# smb.conf Parameters / printing

### `addprinter command`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: string

With the introduction of MS-RPC based printing support for Windows NT/2000 clients in Samba 2.2, The MS Add Printer Wizard (APW) icon is now also available in the "Printers..." folder displayed a share listing. The APW allows for printers to be add remotely to a Samba or Windows NT/2000 print server. For a Samba host this means that the printer must be physically added to the underlying printing system. The addprinter command defines a script to be run which will perform the necessary operations for adding the printer to the print system and to add the appropriate service definition to the smb.conf file in order that it can be shared by smbd 8 . The addprinter command is automatically invoked with the following parameter (in order): printer name share name port name driver name location Windows 9x driver location All parameters are filled in from the PRINTER_INFO_2 structure sent by the Windows NT/2000 client with one exception. The "Windows 9x driver location" parameter is included for backwards compatibility only. The remaining fields in the structure are generated from answers to the APW questions. Once the addprinter command has been executed, smbd will reparse the smb.conf to determine if the share defined by the APW exists. If the sharename is still invalid, then smbd will return an ACCESS_DENIED error to the client. The addprinter command program can output a single line of text, which Samba will set as the port the new printer is connected to. If this line isn't output, Samba won't reload its printer shares.

### `cups connection timeout`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: integer; Default: `30`

This parameter is only applicable if is set to cups . If set, this option specifies the number of seconds that smbd will wait whilst trying to contact to the CUPS server. The connection will fail if it takes longer than this number of seconds.

### `cups encrypt`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: enum; Default: `no`

This parameter is only applicable if is set to cups and if you use CUPS newer than 1.0.x.It is used to define whether or not Samba should use encryption when talking to the CUPS server. Possible values are auto , yes and no When set to auto we will try to do a TLS handshake on each CUPS connection setup. If that fails, we will fall back to unencrypted operation.

### `cups options`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string; Default: `""`

This parameter is only applicable if is set to cups . Its value is a free form string of options passed directly to the cups library. You can pass any generic print option known to CUPS (as listed in the CUPS "Software Users' Manual"). You can also pass any printer specific option (as listed in "lpoptions -d printername -l") valid for the target queue. Multiple parameters should be space-delimited name/value pairs according to the PAPI text option ABNF specification. Collection values ("name={a=... b=... c=...}") are stored with the curley brackets intact. You should set this parameter to raw if your CUPS server error_log file contains messages such as "Unsupported format 'application/octet-stream'" when printing from a Windows client through Samba. It is no longer necessary to enable system wide raw printing in /etc/cups/mime.{convs,types} .

### `cups server`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: string; Default: `""`

This parameter is only applicable if is set to cups . If set, this option overrides the ServerName option in the CUPS client.conf . This is necessary if you have virtual samba servers that connect to different CUPS daemons. Optionally, a port can be specified by separating the server name and port number with a colon. If no port was specified, the default port for IPP (631) will be used.

### `default devmode`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: boolean; Default: `yes`

This parameter is only applicable to services. When smbd is serving Printer Drivers to Windows NT/2k/XP clients, each printer on the Samba server has a Device Mode which defines things such as paper size and orientation and duplex settings. The device mode can only correctly be generated by the printer driver itself (which can only be executed on a Win32 platform). Because smbd is unable to execute the driver code to generate the device mode, the default behavior is to set this field to NULL. Most problems with serving printer drivers to Windows NT/2k/XP clients can be traced to a problem with the generated device mode. Certain drivers will do things such as crashing the client's Explorer.exe with a NULL devmode. However, other printer drivers can cause the client's spooler service (spoolsv.exe) to die if the devmode was not created by the driver itself (i.e. smbd generates a default devmode). This parameter should be used with care and tested with the printer driver in question. It is better to leave the device mode to NULL and let the Windows client set the correct values. Because drivers do not do this all the time, setting default devmode = yes will instruct smbd to generate a default one. For more information on Windows NT/2k printing and Device Modes, see the MSDN documentation .

### `deleteprinter command`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: string

With the introduction of MS-RPC based printer support for Windows NT/2000 clients in Samba 2.2, it is now possible to delete a printer at run time by issuing the DeletePrinter() RPC call. For a Samba host this means that the printer must be physically deleted from the underlying printing system. The defines a script to be run which will perform the necessary operations for removing the printer from the print system and from smb.conf . The is automatically called with only one parameter: . Once the has been executed, smbd will reparse the smb.conf to check that the associated printer no longer exists. If the sharename is still valid, then smbd will return an ACCESS_DENIED error to the client.

### `disable spoolss`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: boolean; Default: `no`

Enabling this parameter will disable Samba's support for the SPOOLSS set of MS-RPC's and will yield identical behavior as Samba 2.0.x. Windows NT/2000 clients will downgrade to using Lanman style printing commands. Windows 9x/ME will be unaffected by the parameter. However, this will also disable the ability to upload printer drivers to a Samba server via the Windows NT Add Printer Wizard or by using the NT printer properties dialog window. It will also disable the capability of Windows NT/2000 clients to download print drivers from the Samba host upon demand. Be very careful about enabling this parameter.

### `enable spoolss`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: boolean-rev; Default: `yes`

Inverted synonym for .

### `enumports command`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: string

The concept of a "port" is fairly foreign to UNIX hosts. Under Windows NT/2000 print servers, a port is associated with a port monitor and generally takes the form of a local port (i.e. LPT1:, COM1:, FILE:) or a remote port (i.e. LPD Port Monitor, etc...). By default, Samba has only one port defined-- "Samba Printer Port" . Under Windows NT/2000, all printers must have a valid port name. If you wish to have a list of ports displayed ( smbd does not use a port name for anything) other than the default "Samba Printer Port" , you can define enumports command to point to a program which should generate a list of ports, one per line, to standard output. This listing will then be used in response to the level 1 and 2 EnumPorts() RPC.

### `force printername`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: boolean; Default: `no`

When printing from Windows NT (or later), each printer in smb.conf has two associated names which can be used by the client. The first is the sharename (or shortname) defined in smb.conf. This is the only printername available for use by Windows 9x clients. The second name associated with a printer can be seen when browsing to the "Printers" (or "Printers and Faxes") folder on the Samba server. This is referred to simply as the printername (not to be confused with the printer name option). When assigning a new driver to a printer on a remote Windows compatible print server such as Samba, the Windows client will rename the printer to match the driver name just uploaded. This can result in confusion for users when multiple printers are bound to the same driver. To prevent Samba from allowing the printer's printername to differ from the sharename defined in smb.conf, set force printername = yes . Be aware that enabling this parameter may affect migrating printers from a Windows server to Samba since Windows has no way to force the sharename and printername to match. It is recommended that this parameter's value not be changed once the printer is in use by clients as this could cause a user not be able to delete printer connections from their local Printers folder.

### `iprint server`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: string; Default: `""`

This parameter is only applicable if is set to iprint . If set, this option overrides the ServerName option in the CUPS client.conf . This is necessary if you have virtual samba servers that connect to different CUPS daemons.

### `load printers`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: boolean; Default: `yes`

A boolean variable that controls whether all printers in the printcap will be loaded for browsing by default. See the printers section for more details.

### `lppause command`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string; Default: `determined by printing parameter`

This parameter specifies the command to be executed on the server host in order to stop printing or spooling a specific print job. This command should be a program or script which takes a printer name and job number to pause the print job. One way of implementing this is by using job priorities, where jobs having a too low priority won't be sent to the printer. If a %p is given then the printer name is put in its place. A %j is replaced with the job number (an integer). On HPUX (see printing=hpux ), if the -p%p option is added to the lpq command, the job will show up with the correct status, i.e. if the job priority is lower than the set fence priority it will have the PAUSED status, whereas if the priority is equal or higher it will have the SPOOLED or PRINTING status. Note that it is good practice to include the absolute path in the lppause command as the PATH may not be available to the server. Currently no default value is given to this string, unless the value of the parameter is SYSV , in which case the default is : lp -i %p-%j -H hold or if the value of the printing parameter is SOFTQ , then the default is: qstat -s -j%j -h .

### `lpq cache time`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: integer; Default: `30`

This controls how long lpq info will be cached for to prevent the lpq command being called too often. A separate cache is kept for each variation of the lpq command used by the system, so if you use different lpq commands for different users then they won't share cache information. The cache files are stored in /tmp/lpq.xxxx where xxxx is a hash of the lpq command in use. The default is 30 seconds, meaning that the cached results of a previous identical lpq command will be used if the cached data is less than 30 seconds old. A large value may be advisable if your lpq command is very slow. A value of 0 will disable caching completely.

### `lpq command`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string; Default: `determined by printing parameter`

This parameter specifies the command to be executed on the server host in order to obtain lpq -style printer status information. This command should be a program or script which takes a printer name as its only parameter and outputs printer status information. Currently nine styles of printer status information are supported; BSD, AIX, LPRNG, PLP, SYSV, HPUX, QNX, CUPS, and SOFTQ. This covers most UNIX systems. You control which type is expected using the printing = option. Some clients (notably Windows for Workgroups) may not correctly send the connection number for the printer they are requesting status information about. To get around this, the server reports on the first printer service connected to by the client. This only happens if the connection number sent is invalid. If a %p is given then the printer name is put in its place. Otherwise it is placed at the end of the command. Note that it is good practice to include the absolute path in the lpq command as the $PATH may not be available to the server. When compiled with the CUPS libraries, no lpq command is needed because smbd will make a library call to obtain the print queue listing.

### `lpresume command`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string; Default: `determined by printing parameter`

This parameter specifies the command to be executed on the server host in order to restart or continue printing or spooling a specific print job. This command should be a program or script which takes a printer name and job number to resume the print job. See also the parameter. If a %p is given then the printer name is put in its place. A %j is replaced with the job number (an integer). Note that it is good practice to include the absolute path in the lpresume command as the PATH may not be available to the server. See also the parameter. Default: Currently no default value is given to this string, unless the value of the printing parameter is SYSV , in which case the default is: lp -i %p-%j -H resume or if the value of the printing parameter is SOFTQ , then the default is: qstat -s -j%j -r

### `lprm command`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string; Default: `determined by printing parameter`

This parameter specifies the command to be executed on the server host in order to delete a print job. This command should be a program or script which takes a printer name and job number, and deletes the print job. If a %p is given then the printer name is put in its place. A %j is replaced with the job number (an integer). Note that it is good practice to include the absolute path in the lprm command as the PATH may not be available to the server. Examples of use are: lprm command = /usr/bin/lprm -P%p %j or lprm command = /usr/bin/cancel %p-%j

### `max print jobs`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: integer; Default: `1000`

This parameter limits the maximum number of jobs allowable in a Samba printer queue at any given moment. If this number is exceeded, smbd 8 will remote "Out of Space" to the client.

### `max reported print jobs`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: integer; Default: `0`

This parameter limits the maximum number of jobs displayed in a port monitor for Samba printer queue at any given moment. If this number is exceeded, the excess jobs will not be shown. A value of zero means there is no limit on the number of print jobs reported.

### `printable`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: boolean; Default: `no`

If this parameter is yes , then clients may open, write to and submit spool files on the directory specified for the service. Note that a printable service will ALWAYS allow writing to the service path (user privileges permitting) via the spooling of print data. The parameter controls only non-printing access to the resource.

### `printcap cache time`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: integer; Default: `750`

This option specifies the number of seconds before the printing subsystem is again asked for the known printers. Setting this parameter to 0 disables any rescanning for new or removed printers after the initial startup.

### `printcap name`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: string; Default: `/etc/printcap`

This parameter may be used to override the compiled-in default printcap name used by the server (usually /etc/printcap ). See the discussion of the [printers] section above for reasons why you might want to do this. To use the CUPS printing interface set printcap name = cups . This should be supplemented by an additional setting cups in the [global] section. printcap name = cups will use the "dummy" printcap created by CUPS, as specified in your CUPS configuration file. On System V systems that use lpstat to list available printers you can use printcap name = lpstat to automatically obtain lists of available printers. This is the default for systems that define SYSV at configure time in Samba (this includes most System V based systems). If printcap name is set to lpstat on these systems then Samba will launch lpstat -v and attempt to parse the output to obtain a printer list. A minimal printcap file would look something like this: print1|My Printer 1 print2|My Printer 2 print3|My Printer 3 print4|My Printer 4 print5|My Printer 5 where the '|' separates aliases of a printer. The fact that the second alias has a space in it gives a hint to Samba that it's a comment. Under AIX the default printcap name is /etc/qconfig . Samba will assume the file is in AIX qconfig format if the string qconfig appears in the printcap filename.

### `print command`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string

After a print job has finished spooling to a service, this command will be used via a system() call to process the spool file. Typically the command specified will submit the spool file to the host's printing subsystem, but there is no requirement that this be the case. The server will not remove the spool file, so whatever command you specify should remove the spool file when it has been processed, otherwise you will need to manually remove old spool files. The print command is simply a text string. It will be used verbatim after macro substitutions have been made: %s, %f - the path to the spool file name %p - the appropriate printer name %J - the job name as transmitted by the client. %c - The number of printed pages of the spooled job (if known). %z - the size of the spooled print job (in bytes) The print command MUST contain at least one occurrence of %s or %f - the %p is optional. At the time a job is submitted, if no printer name is supplied the %p will be silently removed from the printer command. If specified in the [global] section, the print command given will be used for any printable service that does not have its own print command specified. If there is neither a specified print command for a printable service nor a global print command, spool files will be created but not processed and (most importantly) not removed. Note that printing may fail on some UNIXes from the nobody account. If this happens then create an alternative guest account that can print and set the in the [global] section. You can form quite complex print commands by realizing that they are just passed to a shell. For example the following will log a print job, print the file, then remove it. Note that ';' is the usual separator for command in shell scripts. print command = echo Printing %s >> /tmp/print.log; lpr -P %p %s; rm %s You may have to vary this command considerably depending on how you normally print files on your system. The default for the parameter varies depending on the setting of the parameter. Default: For printing = BSD, AIX, QNX, LPRNG or PLP : print command = lpr -r -P%p %s For printing = SYSV or HPUX : print command = lp -c -d%p %s; rm %s For printing = SOFTQ : print command = lp -d%p -s %s; rm %s For printing = CUPS : If SAMBA is compiled against libcups, then cups uses the CUPS API to submit jobs, etc. Otherwise it maps to the System V commands with the -oraw option for printing, i.e. it uses lp -c -d%p -oraw; rm %s . With printing = cups , and if SAMBA is compiled against libcups, any manually set print command will be ignored.

### `printer name`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string

This parameter specifies the name of the printer to which print jobs spooled through a printable service will be sent. If specified in the [global] section, the printer name given will be used for any printable service that does not have its own printer name specified. The default value of the may be lp on many systems.

### `printing`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: enum; Default: `Depends on the operating system`

This parameters controls how printer status information is interpreted on your system. It also affects the default values for the print command , lpq command , lppause command , lpresume command , and lprm command if specified in the [global] section. Currently nine printing styles are supported. They are BSD , AIX , LPRNG , PLP , SYSV , HPUX , QNX , SOFTQ , CUPS and IPRINT . Be aware that CUPS and IPRINT are only available if the CUPS development library was available at the time Samba was compiled or packaged. To see what the defaults are for the other print commands when using the various options use the testparm 1 program. This option can be set on a per printer basis. Please be aware however, that you must place any of the various printing commands (e.g. print command, lpq command, etc...) after defining the value for the printing option since it will reset the printing commands to default values. See also the discussion in the [printers] section. See testparm -v. for the default value on your system

### `printjob username`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string; Default: `%U`

This parameter specifies which user information will be passed to the printing system. Usually, the username is sent, but in some cases, e.g. the domain prefix is useful, too.

### `print notify backchannel`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: boolean; Default: `no`

Windows print clients can update print queue status by expecting the server to open a backchannel SMB connection to them. Due to client firewall settings this can cause considerable timeouts and will often fail, as there is no guarantee the client is even running an SMB server. By default, the Samba print server will not try to connect back to clients, and will treat corresponding requests as if the connection back to the client failed.

### `queuepause command`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string; Default: `determined by printing parameter`

This parameter specifies the command to be executed on the server host in order to pause the printer queue. This command should be a program or script which takes a printer name as its only parameter and stops the printer queue, such that no longer jobs are submitted to the printer. This command is not supported by Windows for Workgroups, but can be issued from the Printers window under Windows 95 and NT. If a %p is given then the printer name is put in its place. Otherwise it is placed at the end of the command. Note that it is good practice to include the absolute path in the command as the PATH may not be available to the server.

### `queueresume command`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: string; Default: `determined by printing parameter`

This parameter specifies the command to be executed on the server host in order to resume the printer queue. It is the command to undo the behavior that is caused by the previous parameter ( ). This command should be a program or script which takes a printer name as its only parameter and resumes the printer queue, such that queued jobs are resubmitted to the printer. This command is not supported by Windows for Workgroups, but can be issued from the Printers window under Windows 95 and NT. If a %p is given then the printer name is put in its place. Otherwise it is placed at the end of the command. Note that it is good practice to include the absolute path in the command as the PATH may not be available to the server.

### `show add printer wizard`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: boolean; Default: `yes`

With the introduction of MS-RPC based printing support for Windows NT/2000 client in Samba 2.2, a "Printers..." folder will appear on Samba hosts in the share listing. Normally this folder will contain an icon for the MS Add Printer Wizard (APW). However, it is possible to disable this feature regardless of the level of privilege of the connected user. Under normal circumstances, the Windows NT/2000 client will open a handle on the printer server with OpenPrinterEx() asking for Administrator privileges. If the user does not have administrative access on the print server (i.e is not root or has granted the SePrintOperatorPrivilege), the OpenPrinterEx() call fails and the client makes another open call with a request for a lower privilege level. This should succeed, however the APW icon will not be displayed. Disabling the show add printer wizard parameter will always cause the OpenPrinterEx() on the server to fail. Thus the APW icon will never be displayed. This does not prevent the same user from having administrative privilege on an individual printer.

### `spoolss: architecture`

Section: printing; Context: G; Type: string; Default: `Windows x64`

Windows spoolss print clients only allow association of server-side drivers with printers when the driver architecture matches the advertised print server architecture. Samba's spoolss print server architecture can be changed using this parameter.

### `use client driver`

Section: printing; Context: S; Type: boolean; Default: `no`

This parameter applies only to Windows NT/2000 clients. It has no effect on Windows 95/98/ME clients. When serving a printer to Windows NT/2000 clients without first installing a valid printer driver on the Samba host, the client will be required to install a local printer driver. From this point on, the client will treat the print as a local printer and not a network printer connection. This is much the same behavior that will occur when disable spoolss = yes . The differentiating factor is that under normal circumstances, the NT/2000 client will attempt to open the network printer using MS-RPC. The problem is that because the client considers the printer to be local, it will attempt to issue the OpenPrinterEx() call requesting access rights associated with the logged on user. If the user possesses local administrator rights but not root privilege on the Samba host (often the case), the OpenPrinterEx() call will fail. The result is that the client will now display an "Access Denied; Unable to connect" message in the printer queue window (even though jobs may successfully be printed). If this parameter is enabled for a printer, then any attempt to open the printer with the PRINTER_ACCESS_ADMINISTER right is mapped to PRINTER_ACCESS_USE instead. Thus allowing the OpenPrinterEx() call to succeed. This parameter MUST not be enabled on a print share which has valid print driver installed on the Samba server.
