# When reporting bugs provide the following information if possible

## Basic Logs

1. Distribution and Desktop Environment.
2. How you installed EasyEffects (Flatpak or distribution-specific package).
3. Messages printed by EasyEffects when executed from command line in debug mode `easyeffects --debug` (first of all, execute `easyeffects -q` to ensure EasyEffects service is terminated before relaunching). If the installation was done through Flatpak the command to get logs is `flatpak run com.github.wwmm.easyeffects --debug`
4. The output of the command `pw-dump`.
5. Screenshots of Pavucontrol tabs.

Sometimes the log messages can be long and a simple copy and paste in the comment will force everybody to scroll a lot in the browser. In order to avoid this I suggest that you attach the logs in a txt file or use the following tags when pasting the log in the comment:
````
<details>
<summary> Short title </summary>

```
put the logs here
```

</details>
````
This is how they will look like in the comment:
<details>
<summary> Short title </summary>
put the logs here
</details>

## Getting Coredumps

Coredumps may be useful when EasyEffects is crashing with a segmentation fault. 

### On Fedora 35 with systemd-coredump and debuginfod

On Fedora 35 or later the process of getting a coredump is relatively straightforward. `debuginfod` will automatically ensure all debug symbols are installed. [[1]](https://blogs.gnome.org/mcatanzaro/2021/09/18/creating-quality-backtraces-for-crash-reports/)

To get the coredump of the most recent crash:  
`coredumpctl gdb`  

If needed you may press `c` to start recording, or press `q` to stop recording.

### More detail

To get them run the command `sudo coredumpctl list`. This should show an output like this:
```
TIME                            PID   UID   GID SIG COREFILE  EXE
Sat 2018-10-13 17:58:21 -03   16527  1000  1000  11 present   /usr/bin/nautilus
```
Once you have the PID of the core dump generated by EE run the command `coredumpctl info pid_value` and show its output to us using the same rules explained in the basic section above

### How to quickly make a coredump on Ubuntu

First, install debug symbols as described here: https://github.com/wwmm/easyeffects/issues/345#issuecomment-433689584

Then install `systemd-coredump`:

```sudo apt install systemd-coredump```

`easyeffects`, reproduce the segfault

```coredumpctl -o /tmp/pe372.coredump dump /usr/bin/easyeffects```

The file ` /tmp/pe372.coredump` will be your coredump.  
The file will be around 350 MB, but if you run `xz -9 --threads=0 /tmp/pe372.coredump`, you will get the file `/tmp/pe372.coredump.xz` around 3.5 MB.

### With Flatpak
On Debian 11/Ubuntu 21.04 or later (not necessary on Fedora): 
```
sudo apt install libflatpak-dev -y
```

Install necesssary debug packages:  
```
flatpak update -y
flatpak install --include-sdk --include-debug com.github.wwmm.easyeffects//stable -y
```

Get the coredump:
```
flatpak-coredumpctl com.github.wwmm.easyeffects
```