# ASCII art

## Software
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

For diagrams there is https://asciiflow.com/.

## Arch ASCII logos
See the original forum thread.

From  3.6.5-1:

From  0.4.7-1:

From :

ArchWiki's birthday celebration:

User art:

by Cyllos

by LnLcFlx

Code page 437 save (e.g. ):

by Hendrikto (modified from the version by LnLcFlx)

by cmang

by abdrsk

## Cowsay
Here are some examples of  and fortune used together:

## Default cow with fortune
* Combined with the program :

 $ cowthink $(fortune)

The ASCII images are generated by  text files located in , and all themes can be listed with the .  These files can be edited to the user's liking; custom images can also be created from scratch or found on the net. The easiest way create a custom cow file is to use an existing one as a template.  To test the custom file:

 $ cowsay -f /path/to/file $(fortune)

## Random cow with fortune
 $ fortune -c | cowthink -f $(find /usr/share/cowsay -type f | shuf -n 1)

## Random custom cow with fortune
Complex commands can be chained to produce detailed ASCII art such as this Futurama example.
* Display a random cow with a random facial expression and wrap long lines of fortune text:

 $ fortune -a | fmt -80 -s | $(shuf -n 1 -e cowsay cowthink) -$(shuf -n 1 -e b d g p s t w y) -f $(shuf -n 1 -e $(cowsay -l | tail -n +2)) -n

## Ponysay
For full 256-colored cowsay-like art use  (version 3.0 has 422 ponies). The syntax is the same, meaning  to say something and  for a complete list of ponies. To select a pony to display, run , where  is a pony. To create more ponies use  and store them in  and  for desktop and TTY, respectively.
