# Audit framework

The Linux audit framework provides a CAPP-compliant (Controlled Access Protection Profile) auditing system that reliably collects information about any security-relevant (or non-security-relevant) event on a system. It can help you track actions  performed on a system.

Linux audit helps make your system more secure by providing you with means to analyze what is happening on your system in great detail. It does not, however, provide additional security itself—it does not protect your system from code malfunctions or any kind of exploits. Instead, Audit is useful for tracking these issues and helps you take additional security measures to prevent them.

The audit framework works by listening to the event reported by the kernel and logging them to a log file.

## Installation
In-kernel audit support is available in all officially supported kernels. For custom kernels  should be enabled. Userspace support is provided by the  package that is already installed as a dependency of  packages.

Audit can be enabled at boot-time by setting  as kernel parameter. This will ensure that all processes that run before the audit daemon starts are marked as auditable by the kernel. Not doing that will make a few processes impossible to properly audit. See .

Audit framework is composed of the auditd daemon, responsible for writing the audit messages that were generated through the audit kernel interface and triggered by application and system activity. Start/enable  to activate the daemon.

This daemon can be controlled, or fine tuned, by several commands and files:

* : to control the behavior of the daemon on the fly, adding rules etc.
* : contains the rules and various parameters of the auditd daemon. This file is automatically generated from  by . See  and  for details.
* : generate report of the activity on a system
* : search for various events
* : takes audit events and distributes them to child programs that want to analyze events in realtime. As of 2026Q2, the core repository had two plugins packages:  and . Without any plugins installed, systemctl status auditd warning   does not mean the basic framework is not functional.
* : configuration file related to the logging. See  for details.

## Adding rules
Before adding rules, you must know that the audit framework can be very verbose and that each rule must be carefully tested before being effectively deployed. Indeed, just one rule can flood all your logs within a few minutes.

## Audit files and directories access
The most basic use of the audit framework is to log the access to the files you want.
To do this, you must place a watch on a file or a directory. A concrete example is to track accesses to the passwd file:

 # auditctl -a always,exit -F arch=b64 -F path=/etc/passwd -F perm=rwxa
 # auditctl -a always,exit -F arch=b32 -F path=/etc/passwd -F perm=rwxa

You can track access to a folder with:

 # auditctl -a always,exit -F arch=b64 -F dir=/etc/security
 # auditctl -a always,exit -F arch=b32 -F dir=/etc/security

The first rule keeps track of every read  , write  , execution  , attribute change   to the file .
The second one keeps track of any access to the  folder.

You can list all active rules with:

 # auditctl -l

You can delete all rules with:

 # auditctl -D

Once you validate the rules, you can add them to a .rules file in :

## Audit syscalls
The audit framework allows you to audit the syscalls performed with the  option.

A security related rule is to track the  syscall, to detect file ownership changes:

 # auditctl -a exit,always -S chmod

For a list of all syscalls:

A lot of rules and possibilities are available, see  and .

## Filter unwanted messages
In order to prevent noisy audit messages from flooding system logs you may add rules to exclude some of them:

Remember to verify changes (fix as necessary) and regenerate  as follows:

 # augenrules --check
 # augenrules --load

## Search the logs
The audit framework provides some tools to ease the use and the research of events happening on a system.

## Using pid
You can search events related to a particular pid using :

 # ausearch -p 1

This command will show you all the events logged according to your rules related to PID 1 (i.e. systemd).

## Using keys
One of the great features of the audit framework is its ability to use  to manage events, such a usage is recommended.

You can use the  option in your rules to be able to find related events easily:

 # auditctl -a always,exit -F arch=b64 -F path=/etc/passwd -F perm=rwxa -F key=KEY_pwd

Then, if you search for events with the key , ausearch will display only event related to the file .

 # ausearch -k KEY_pwd

## Look for abnormalities
The  tool can be used to quickly report any abnormal event performed on the system, it includes network interfaces used in promiscous mode, process or thread crashing or exiting with ENOMEM error etc.

The easiest way to use  is:

 # aureport -n

aureport can be used to generate custom reports, see .

## Which files or syscalls are worth-auditing?
Keep in mind that each audit rule added will generate logs, so you must be ready to treat this amount of information.
Basically, each security-related event/file must be monitored, like ids, ips, anti-rootkits etc.
On the other side, it is totally useless to track every write syscall, the smallest compilation will fill your logs with this event.

More complex set of rules can be set up, performing auditing on a very fine-grained base. If you want to do so, see .

## Gather logs from different hosts
The audit framework has a plugin system which provides the possibility to send local logfiles to a remote auditd.

## Send logfiles
To send your logfiles to a remote host you need the  plugin which belongs to the  package.
Activate the plugin:

and set the remote host where the logs should be send to:

## Receive logfiles
To make audit listen for remote audispds you just need to set the tcp options:

Now you can view the logs of all configured hosts in the logfiles of the receiving auditd.

## Rotate the logs
Send  to the audit daemon:

 # pkill -USR1 -x auditd

## Troubleshooting
## Audit logs flooding into virtual console
For users not having enabled auditd, using kernel debug messages higher than  can result in audit flooding security notices on top of virtual terminal.

These messages can be silenced by enabling .

Alternative solutions are:

* lowering your loglevel,
* disabling audit logs with the kernel parameter .

See the systemd issue 15324 on GitHub for the details.

## Tips and Tricks
## Can not restart/stop manually
For a clean state one is better verifying the unit is not in use by, for example, making sure no rules are active before trying to stop the daemon.
 # systemctl stop auditd
 Failed to stop auditd.service: Operation refused, unit auditd.service may be requested by dependency only (it is configured to refuse manual start/stop).
 See system logs and 'systemctl status auditd.service' for details.
The auditd systemd unit is set to . It can be stopped manually by

 # systemctl kill auditd
See restarting auditd service gives dependency error for more details.

## A short script for auditing a command
The 121 lines audit_pacman.sh bash script from  pacman bug #297 can serve as a full, real world, example for adding rules, using them while running pacman, cleaning afterwards and extracting the desired information.
