# Creating packages

This article aims to assist users creating their own packages using the ports–like Arch build system, also for submission in Arch User Repository. It covers creation of a —a package build description file sourced by makepkg to create a binary package from source.

For instructions regarding existing rules and ways to improve package quality, see Arch package guidelines.

## Overview
Packages in Arch Linux are built using the makepkg utility and the information stored in a  file. When makepkg runs, it searches for a  in the current directory and follows the instructions in it to acquire the required files and/or compile them to be packed within a package file . The resulting package contains binary files and installation instructions ready to be installed by pacman.

An Arch package is no more than a  archive, or a tarball, compressed using , which contains the following files generated by makepkg:

* The binary files to install.
*  — contains all the metadata needed by pacman to deal with packages, dependencies, etc.
*  — contains information needed for reproducible builds, also see  and .
*  — contains hashes and timestamps of the files, which are included in the local database so that pacman can verify the integrity of the package.
*  — an optional file used to execute commands after the install/upgrade/remove stage (this file is present only if specified in the ).
*  — an optional file kept by the package maintainer documenting the changes of the package.

## Preparation
## Prerequisite software
First, ensure that the necessary tools are installed: the meta package  should be sufficient; it pulls in  and additional tools needed for compiling from source.

The key tool for building packages is makepkg (provided by ). The tasks it performs can be found in Arch package guidelines#Makepkg duties.

## Download and test the installation
Download the source tarball of the software you want to package, extract it, and follow the author's steps to install the program.  Make a note of all commands and/or steps needed to compile and install it. You will be repeating those same commands in the  file.

Most software authors stick to the 3-step build cycle:

 $ ./configure
 $ make
 # make install

This is a good time to make sure the program is working correctly.

## Set up clean chroot
It is recommended to follow Building in a clean chroot to ensure that packages and configuration of your system do not lead to mistakes in the . This is a more robust and correct way to build packages and will often catch missing dependencies that you did not realize were needed because they already existed in your system.

## Creating a PKGBUILD
When  is run, it looks for a  file in the current working directory. If it finds one, it downloads the software's source code and compiles it according to the instructions specified in the  file. The instructions must be fully interpretable by the Bash shell.

After successful completion, the resulting binaries and metadata of the package, i.e. package version and dependencies, are packed in a  package file. The newly created package can be installed by simply using  which will call pacman in the background, or by directly using .

To start building a new package, first create a new directory for the package and change current directory into this one. Then, a  file needs to be created: a prototype  found in  can be used or you can start from a  from another package. The latter may be a good choice if a similar package already exists.

## PKGBUILD variables
makepkg predefines the following variables that should be used by packagers to refer to temporary locations during the build process:

; : This points to the directory where makepkg extracts or symlinks all files in the source array.
; : This points to the directory where makepkg bundles the installed package, which becomes the root directory of your built package.

They contain absolute paths, which means you do not have to worry about your working directory if you use these variables properly.

## PKGBUILD functions
When building a package,  will change into the source directory, before invoking the following five functions if they have been defined in the . Function  is required in every  and will always be invoked. If any of the other functions is not defined,  will simply skip the invocation of that function.

During the build, the functions are invoked in the order in which they are listed here.

Also see .

## prepare()
With this function, commands that are used to prepare sources for building are run, such as patching. This function runs right after package extraction, before pkgver() and the build function. If extraction is skipped (), then  is not run.

When it is not clear whether to put something in  or , one rule of thumb is to put in  the steps that should run exactly once after extracting the sources, and put in  the steps which would make sense to re-run after any manual edits to the extracted files.

## pkgver()
 runs after the sources are fetched, extracted and prepare() executed. So you can update the pkgver variable during a makepkg stage.

This is particularly useful if you are making git/svn/hg/etc. packages, where the build process may remain the same, but the source could be updated every day, even every hour. The old way of doing this was to put the date into the pkgver field which, if the software was not updated, makepkg would still rebuild it thinking the version had changed. Some useful commands for this are , , etc. Please test these before submitting a , as a failure in the  function can stop a build in its tracks.

## build()
Now, you need to implement the  function in the  file. This function uses common shell commands in Bash syntax to automatically compile software and create a directory called  to install the software to.  This allows makepkg to package files without having to sift through your file system.

The first step in the  function is to change into the directory created by uncompressing the source tarball. makepkg will change the current directory to  before executing the  function. Therefore, in most cases, like suggested in , the first command will look like this:

 cd "$pkgname-$pkgver"

Now, you need to list the same commands you used when you manually compiled the software. The  function in essence automates everything you did by hand and compiles the software in the fakeroot build environment. If the software you are packaging uses a configure script, it is good practice to use  when building packages for pacman. A lot of software installs files relative to the  directory, which should only be done if you are manually building from source. All Arch Linux packages should use the  directory. As seen in the  file, the next two lines often look like this:

 ./configure --prefix=/usr
 make

## check()
Place for calls to  and similar testing routines. It is highly recommended to have  as it helps to make sure software has been built correctly and works fine with its dependencies.

Users who do not need it (and occasionally maintainers who can not fix a package for this to pass) can disable it by running  with the  flag.

If you are testing a GUI application, you can run it in a virtual xserver.

## package()
The final step is to put the compiled files in a directory where makepkg can retrieve them to create a package.  This by default is the  directory—a simple fakeroot environment. The  directory replicates the hierarchy of the root file system of the software's installation paths. If you have to manually place files under the root of your filesystem, you should install them in the  directory under the same directory structure.  For example, if you want to install a file to , it should instead be placed under . Very few install procedures require the user to copy dozens of files manually. Instead, for most software, calling  will do so. The final line should look like the following in order to correctly install the software in the  directory:

 make DESTDIR="$pkgdir" install

 runs only the  function, so it creates a package without building. This may save time e.g. if you have changed just the  variable of the package.

## Testing the PKGBUILD and package
As you are writing the  function, you will want to test your changes frequently to ensure there are no bugs. You can do this using the  command in the directory containing the  file. With a properly formatted , makepkg will create a package; with a broken or unfinished , it will raise an error.

If makepkg finishes successfully, it will place a file named  in your working directory. This package can be installed with the  command. However, just because a package file was built does not imply that it is fully functional. It might conceivably contain only the directory and no files whatsoever if, for example, a prefix was specified improperly. You can use pacmans query functions to display a list of files contained in the package with , and the dependencies it requires with .

If the package looks sane, then you are done! However, if you plan on releasing the  file, it is imperative that you check and double-check the contents of the  array.

Also ensure that the package binaries actually run flawlessly! It is annoying to release a package that contains all necessary files, but crashes because of some obscure configuration option that does not quite work well with the rest of the system. If you are only going to compile packages for your own system, though, you do not need to worry too much about this quality assurance step, as you are the only person suffering from mistakes, after all.

## Checking package sanity
After testing package functionality, check it for errors using namcap:

 $ namcap PKGBUILD
 $ namcap pkgname.pkg.tar.zst

Namcap will:
* check  contents for common errors and package file hierarchy for unnecessary/misplaced files,
* scan all ELF files in the package using , automatically reporting which packages with required shared libraries are missing from  and which can be omitted as transitive dependencies,
* heuristically search for missing and redundant dependencies,
and much more.

Get into the habit of checking your packages with namcap to avoid having to fix the simplest mistakes after package submission.

## Using pkgctl to build in a clean chroot environment
You can use  from  to check if the package can be built where no other packages are already installed. While in the PKGBUILD directory:

 $ pkgctl build

And check the output for potential errors or warnings. If the package depends on other AUR packages, those packages must be built and brought into chroot jail:

 $ pkgctl build -I path/to/somepkg.tar.gz -I ...

Refer to  for more options.

## Submitting packages to the AUR
Please read AUR submission guidelines for a detailed description of the submission process.

## Summary
# Download the source tarball of the software to package.
# Try compiling the package and installing it into an arbitrary directory.
# Copy over the prototype  and rename it to  in a temporary working directory.
# Edit the  according to the needs of your package.
# Run  and check whether the package builds correctly.
# If not, repeat the previous two steps.

## Warnings
* Before you can automate the package building process, you should have done it manually at least once unless you know exactly what you are doing in advance, in which case you would not be reading this in the first place. Unfortunately, although a good bunch of program authors stick to the 3-step build cycle of "; ; ", this is not always the case, and things can get real ugly if you have to apply patches to make everything work at all. Rule of thumb: If you cannot get the program to compile from the source tarball, and make it install itself to a defined, temporary subdirectory, you do not even need to try packaging it. There is not any magic pixie dust in  that makes source problems go away.
* In a few cases, the packages are not even available as source and you have to use something like  to get it to work. You will have to do quite a bit of research (read READMEs, INSTALL instructions, man pages, perhaps ebuilds from Gentoo or other package installers, possibly even the MAKEFILEs or source code) to get it working. In some really bad cases, you have to edit the source files to get it to work at all. However,  needs to be completely autonomous, with no user input. Therefore if you need to edit the makefiles, you may have to bundle a custom patch with the  and install it from inside the  function, or you might have to issue some  commands from inside the  function.

## Automation
## Checksums
The process of updating checksums for new software releases can be automated by the  tool; see Makepkg#Generate new checksums for details.

## PKGBUILD generators
s for some packages can be generated automatically.

* Haskell: cblrepo,
* Node.js:
* Perl:
* Python: , ,
* Ruby: ,
* Rust: ,

## New upstream releases
pkgctl (from the  package) supports nvchecker integration in the form of a  configuration file (which should be placed in the same directory as the ). See the pacman package's .nvchecker.toml configuration file for an example.

You can then use  to check if a new upstream version has been released (compared to the one specified as  in the ) and  to update the  accordingly. See  for more details.
