# Dell G5 5590-9340

{| class="wikitable archwiki-table-laptop"
|-
! Hardware !! PCI/USB ID !! Working?
|-
| GPU (Intel) || ||
|-
| GPU (Nvidia) || ||
|-
| Wireless || ||
|-
| Bluetooth || ||
|-
| Audio || ||
|-
| Touchpad || ||
|-
| Webcam || ||
|-
| Card reader || ||
|-
| Ethernet || ||
|}

This page describes Dell G5 5590-9340 laptop.

## Installation
* Disable RAID and switch to AHCI in UEFI (System Configuration > SATA Operation > AHCI).
* Disable Secure Boot to be able to install the sytem (Secure Boot > Secure Boot Enable > Disable).

## Firmware
 is not working with this laptop, but you can us a USB drive with a FAT32 filesystem and put the BIOS update executable on it. Reboot, start boot menu (using ) and select BIOS Flash Update menu entry.
## Graphics
## External monitor
If you are experiencing:

* Inability to use external monitor at all (does not detected or using invalid resolution).
* Rendering slowdown which can be described as "it renders one frame per second".

To fix it make your nVidia GPU as primary:

[https://bbs.archlinux.org/viewtopic.php?pid=1881083#p1881083 Reference

## Screen tearing with nVidia
Enable full composition pipeline:

{{hc|/etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/11-nvidia-tearing.conf|output=
Section "Screen"
    Identifier "Screen0"
    Device "Device0"
    Monitor "Monitor0"
    Option "metamodes" "nvidia-auto-select +0+0 {ForceFullCompositionPipeline=On}"
    Option "AllowIndirectGLXProtocol" "off"
    Option "TripleBuffer" "on"
EndSection
}}

## Suspend-To-RAM
## Switch to deep
See Power management/Suspend and hibernate#Changing suspend method.

## Long recovery times
To fix long recovery times from suspend to RAM and  dmesg errors ( and ), blacklist the  module.

Reference

## Keyboard
## Control keyboard backlight
See Keyboard backlight.

## RGB backlight
A Brazilian model with RGB backlight exists, but there are no evidences that RGB backlight is working in Linux.
