# Dnsmasq

dnsmasq provides a DNS server, a DHCP server with support for DHCPv6 and PXE, and a TFTP server. It is designed to be lightweight and have a small footprint, suitable for resource constrained routers and firewalls. dnsmasq can also be configured to cache DNS queries for improved DNS lookup speeds to previously visited sites.

## Installation
Install the  package. Then start/enable .

The network will also need to be restarted so the DHCP client can create a new .

## Configuration
To configure dnsmasq, edit . The file contains comments explaining the options. For all available options see .

## DNS server
To set up dnsmasq as a DNS caching daemon on a single computer specify a  directive, adding in the localhost IP address:

 listen-address=::1,127.0.0.1

To use this computer to listen on its LAN IP address for other computers on the network. It is recommended that you use a static LAN IP in this case. E.g.:

 listen-address=::1,127.0.0.1,192.168.1.1

You may alternatively assign a network interface:

 interface=enp5s0

Set the number of cached domain names with  (the default is ):

 cache-size=10000

To validate DNSSEC load the DNSSEC trust anchors provided by the  package and set the option :

 conf-file=/usr/share/dnsmasq/trust-anchors.conf
 dnssec

See  for more options you might want to use.

## DNS addresses file and forwarding
After configuring dnsmasq, you need to add the localhost addresses as the only nameservers in . This causes all queries to be sent to dnsmasq.

Since dnsmasq is a stub resolver not a recursive resolver you must set up forwarding to an external DNS server. This can be done automatically by using openresolv or by manually specifying the DNS server address in dnsmasq's configuration.

## openresolv
If your network manager supports resolvconf, instead of directly altering , you can use openresolv to generate configuration files for dnsmasq.

Edit  and add the loopback addresses as name servers, and configure openresolv to write out dnsmasq configuration:

Run  so that the configuration files get created. If the files do not exist  will fail to start.

Edit dnsmasq's configuration file to use openresolv's generated configuration# Read configuration generated by openresolv
 conf-file=/etc/dnsmasq-conf.conf
 resolv-file=/etc/dnsmasq-resolv.conf

## Manual forwarding
First you must set localhost addresses as the only nameservers in :

Make sure to protect  from modification as described in Domain name resolution#Overwriting of /etc/resolv.conf.

Alternatively, NetworkManager may be configured to automatically generate the  file for a specific connection with the following commands:

 $ nmcli connection modify 'connection-name' ipv4.dns 127.0.0.1
 $ nmcli connection modify 'connection-name' ipv4.dns-options trust-ad
 $ nmcli connection modify 'connection-name' ipv4.ignore-auto-dns yes
 $ nmcli connection modify 'connection-name' ipv6.dns ::1
 $ nmcli connection modify 'connection-name' ipv6.dns-options trust-ad
 $ nmcli connection modify 'connection-name' ipv6.ignore-auto-dns yes

Then restart .

The upstream DNS server addresses must then be specified in dnsmasq's configuration file as . Also add  so dnsmasq does not needlessly read  which only contains the localhost addresses of itself.

Now DNS queries will be resolved with dnsmasq, only checking external servers if it cannot answer the query from its cache.

## Adding a custom domain
You can assign a domain simply by adding:

 address=/router/192.168.1.1

Alternatively, if you continue to use add a custom domain to hosts in your (local) network:

 local=/home.arpa/
 domain=home.arpa

In this example it is possible to ping a host/device (e.g. defined in your  file) as .

Uncomment  to add the custom domain to hosts entries:

 expand-hosts

Without this setting, you will have to add the domain to entries of .

## Test
To do a lookup speed test choose a website that has not been visited since dnsmasq has been started (drill is part of the  package):

 $ drill archlinux.org | grep "Query time"

Running the command again will use the cached DNS IP and result in a faster lookup time if dnsmasq is setup correctly:

To test if DNSSEC validation is working see DNSSEC#Test the local validating resolver.

## DHCP server
By default dnsmasq has the DHCP functionality turned off, if you want to use it you must turn it on.  Here are the important settings:

See  for more options.

## Proxy DHCP
In case there is already a DHCP server running on the network and you want to interoperate with it, dnsmasq can be set to behave as a "proxy DHCP", therefore only serving the #PXE server specific information to the client. This mode is only available with IPv4. Use the following syntax, providing the existing DHCP server address:
 dhcp-range=192.168.0.1,proxy

## Test
From a computer that is connected to the one with dnsmasq on it, configure it to use DHCP for automatic IP address assignment, then attempt to log into the network normally.

If you inspect the  file on the server, you should be able to see the lease.

## TFTP server
dnsmasq has built-in TFTP server.

To use it, create a root directory for TFTP (e.g. ) to put transferable files in.
 enable-tftp
 tftp-root=/srv/tftp
For increased security it is advised to use dnsmasq's TFTP secure mode. In secure mode only files owned by the  user will be served over TFTP. You will need to chown TFTP root and all files in it to  user to use this feature.
 tftp-secure

See  for more options.

## PXE server
PXE requires a DHCP and a TFTP server; both can be provided by dnsmasq. To setup the PXE server, follow these steps:

# Setup the #TFTP server and the #DHCP server (in full DHCP or proxy mode) in the dnsmasq configuration file,
# Copy and configure a PXE compatible boot loader (e.g. PXELINUX) in the TFTP root directory,
# Enable PXE in the dnsmasq configuration file:

To simply send one file:

 dhcp-boot=lpxelinux.0

To send a file depending on client architecture:

 pxe-service=x86PC,"PXELINUX (BIOS)",bios/lpxelinux
 pxe-service=X86-64_EFI,"PXELINUX (EFI)",efi64/syslinux.efi

In case  does not work to identify the architecture (especially for UEFI-based clients), combination of  and  can be used. See RFC 4578 2.1 for more  numbers for use with dhcp boot protocol.

 dhcp-match=set:efi-x86_64,option:client-arch,7
 dhcp-match=set:efi-x86_64,option:client-arch,9
 dhcp-match=set:efi-x86,option:client-arch,6
 dhcp-match=set:bios,option:client-arch,0
 dhcp-boot=tag:efi-x86_64,efi64/syslinux.efi
 dhcp-boot=tag:efi-x86,efi32/syslinux.efi
 dhcp-boot=tag:bios,bios/lpxelinux.0

See  for more options.

The rest is up to the boot loader.

## Tips and tricks
## Prevent OpenDNS redirecting Google queries
To prevent OpenDNS from redirecting all Google queries to their own search server, add to :

 server=/www.google.com/isp-dns-ip

## Override addresses
In some cases, such as when operating a captive portal, it can be useful to resolve specific domains names to a hard-coded set of addresses. This is done with the  config:

 address=/example.com/1.2.3.4

Furthermore, it is possible to return a specific address for all domain names that are not answered from  or DHCP by using a special wildcard:

 address=/#/1.2.3.4

## More than one instance
If we want two or more dnsmasq servers works per interface(s).

## Static
To do this statically - one server per interface, use the  and  options. This starts a second dnsmasq instance and is only required when running a concurrent nameserver.

To simply co-exist with  for example, add  to the dnsmsaq service start options.

## Dynamic
In this case we can exclude per interface and bind any others:

 except-interface=lo
 bind-dynamic

## Domain blocklisting
To blocklist domains, i.e. answer queries for them with NXDOMAIN, use the  option without specifying the IP address:

 address=/blocked.example/
 address=/anotherblocked.example/

Wildcards are also supported. Add a  to the start of the pattern:

 # blocks both blocked.example and anotherblocked.example and all their subdomains
 address=/*blocked.example/

 # blocks subdomains like mail.google.com but not google.com
 address=/*.google.com/

Some specific subdomains can be unblocked using  as the server address:

 # blocks google.com and all subdomains except mail.google.com.
 address=/google.com/
 server=/mail.google.com/#

For ease of use place the blocklist in a separate file, e.g.  and load it from  with  or .

{{Tip|
* A list of potential sources for the blocklist can be found in [https://github.com/openwrt/packages/blob/master/net/adblock/files/README.md OpenWrt's adblock package's README.
* A hosts file blocklist can be used with the  option or it can be converted to a dnsmasq blocklist with this awk command: {{ic|1=awk '/^{ print "address=/"$2"/"$1"" }' hosts.txt}}.
}}

## View cache statistics
Cache statistics can be queried using chaos requests, using the  utility from the  package:

 $ drill misses.bind TXT CH
 $ drill hits.bind TXT CH

The output will respectively contain the number of cache misses and hits:

 ;; ANSWER SECTION:
 misses.bind.    0       CH      TXT     "411"

Other options are , , ,  and .
