# HP 255 G10

{| class="wikitable archwiki-table-laptop"
|-
! Hardware !! PCI/USB ID !! Working?
|-
| Touchpad || ||
|-
| Keyboard || ||
|-
| Wi-Fi ||  ||
|-
| Bluetooth ||  ||
|-
| Webcam ||  ||
|-
| GPU ||  ||
|-
| TPM ||  ||
|}

## Installation
Secure Boot must be disabled. This is pretty ordinary except for the fact that after disabling it, there will be a BIOS popup, asking to confirm the decision.
Hammering  to get into the boot menu will dismiss the prompt and turn Secure Boot back on.

## Accessibility
The appearance of the BIOS is simple but does not have much contrast. It can be navigated with just the keyboard.

## Firmware
fwupd does not support this device yet. The firmware can only be updated using Windows. The tool has not been tested with Wine and it is unknown whether it would work.

Under Configuration you will need to disable Action Keys, which is similar to Fn lock, in order for the Fn keys to work under Linux.

## Wi-Fi
This device does not have an Ethernet port and the usage of Wi-Fi is pretty much mandatory.

The following kernel module parameters are required for at least the Realtek Semiconductor Co., Ltd. RTL8852BE PCIe 802.11ax Wireless Network Controller card (ID: ) and must be applied at boot. Unloading the module and loading it again with the parameters is insufficient.

 rtw89_pci disable_aspm_l1=Y disable_aspm_l1ss=Y

Failure to apply them correctly will lead to the card hard freezing and becoming unusable until the next cold boot.Bluetooth audio may be choppy when Wi-Fi is used simultaneously, even if only 5 GHz is used. Disable powersaving mode via a kernel module parameter to solve this[https://github.com/lwfinger/rtw89/issues/262:

 rtw89_core disable_ps_mode=y

## Webcam
While the webcam works out of the box, the laptop ships with a built-in physical webcam cover, which appears to double as a physical switch.
This means that when the webcam switch is toggled, the firmware will replace the video stream with a static image of a crossed out camera after around 2 seconds of blank video. See https://web.archive.org/https://h30434.www3.hp.com/t5/Notebook-Video-Display-and-Touch/Camera-Privacy-Switch-Stuck/td-p/8928477.

## Function keys
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Key
! Visible?1
! Marked?2
! Effect
|-
|  ||  ||  || Marked as ☺. Emits , , , x2, , , ,  all at once when pressed.
|-
|  ||  ||  ||
|-
|  ||  ||  ||
|-
|  || 3 ||  ||
|-
|  ||  ||  ||
|-
|  ||  ||  ||
|-
|  || 3, 4 ||  ||  (libinput)
|-
|  ||  ||  ||
|-
|  ||  ||  ||
|-
|  ||  ||  ||
|-
|  ||  ||  ||
|-
|  ||  ||  ||  x2
|}

# The key is visible to  and similar tools.
# The physical key has a symbol on it, which describes its function.
# The physical key has an indicator LED, which is not working.
# Works under Wayland (KDE Plasma) but not X11. Reports  in  but nothing in  or
