# HP Envy x360 15-fe0000

{| class="wikitable archwiki-table-laptop"
|-
! Hardware !! PCI/USB ID !! Working?
|-
| GPU ||  ||
|-
| GPU (dedicated) ||  ||
|-
| Wi-Fi ||  ||
|-
| Bluetooth ||  ||
|-
| Audio ||  ||
|-
| Sensors ||  ||
|}

The HP Envy x360 2-in-1 15-fe0000 was released in May 2023 and has an Intel® Core™ i5-1335U or an Intel® Core™ i7-1355U CPU with an integrated Intel® Iris® Xe GPU, and optionally a NVIDIA® GeForce RTX™ 3050 Laptop GPU, 8GB or 16GB of RAM and a 1080p display.

The laptop comes with a 55Wh battery.

## Installation
This laptop has Secure Boot enabled by default. To start the installer you need to disable it in the UEFI. Then you can just boot the installer in UEFI mode and just install like a normal UEFI system. You can start using Secure Boot in Linux via Unified Extensible Firmware Interface/Secure Boot.

## Audio
Audio does not work at all by default, but the microphone, headphone jack and HDMI audio can be used when installing . The internal speaker does not work without manual intervention.

## Orientation sensor
See Tablet PC#Automatic rotation.

## Touchscreen and stylus
Everything works out of the box, both for touch and stylus use. If using a stylus, the system can differentiate between the stylus, and properly does palm rejection if using something like Xournal++. The experience is exactly the same as with Windows. This has only been tested with a HP stylus.

## RFKill
By default, when switching between the laptop and tablet mode, when rotating the screen or when booting, the Bluetooth and Wi-Fi modules get soft-blocked by rfkill. To circumvent this, this udev hwdb config can be applied:https://askubuntu.com/questions/1426028/22-04-airplane-mode-activated-whenever-lid-closes-opens-screen-switches-orienta

These commands then apply this change:

 # systemd-hwdb update
 # udevadm trigger
