# LG Gram 16 2-in-1 2023

{| class="wikitable archwiki-table-laptop"
|-
! Hardware !! PCI/USB ID !! Working?
|-
| Touchscreen || ||
|-
| Touchpad || ||
|-
| Keyboard || ||
|-
| GPU ||  ||
|-
| Webcam ||  ||
|-
| Bluetooth ||  ||
|-
| Audio ||  ||
|-
| Wireless ||  ||
|-
| Orientation and tablet-mode sensors || ||
|-
| Micro-SD reader || ||
|-
| TPM || ||
|}

Model 16T90R-K.ADB9U1 with Intel 13th-gen i7-1360P (Raptor Lake). linux-hardware probe.

## Installation
Before installing it is necessary to modify some UEFI Settings. They can be accessed by pressing  repeatedly when booting.

* Disable secure boot to allow Linux to boot. Alternatively, you can choose to set up Secure Boot so that it works with Linux and you can take advantage of its potential security benefits.

Installation of Arch Linux can proceed normally. Refer to the Installation guide for more information.

## Audio
Internal speakers are not working as of kernel 6.2 with sof-audio-pci-intel-tgl kernel module loaded.
This seems to be a common problem with the Realtek ALC298 codec (so it is a low-level HDA issue, that occurs with or without `sof` installed). (see eg launchpad, superuser (Ubuntu), debian, and linuxmint forum ; and upstream thesofproject#4363).

The workaround is to apply solution (1) from comment 14 in Kernel bug 212041. This should work immediately and then needs to be applied on each (cold) boot with eg systemd.

## Keyboard
Keyboard is decent with a "slim" numpad. It is properly disabled in tablet mode.

F-keys are working as F-keys by default which is a nice surprise, and there is no Fn-lock key if you prefer easier access to the special keys (volume etc) but you can toggle  for this
(source: superuser).

As in many laptops, in Brazil, as their ABNT-2 layout as an additional key (102 keys), the right control key becomes mapped to this extra key ('/', key code 97 instead of 105,  in xkb).

## Other
* No HDMI port but USB-C/Thunderbolt docks work.
* 2560x1600 16" display works great with KDE fractional scaling set at around 125%.
* Suspend, which is the new-ish s2idle, is working most of the time with very little battery drain.
* KDE will show an on-screen-keyboard if one is installed (eg maliit-keyboard), when the touchscreen is being used, even in "laptop mode".
