# Machine-check exception

This article aims to help users implement services to actively monitor, log, and report hardware errors. A machine check exception (MCE) is an error generated by the CPU when the CPU detects that a hardware error or failure has occurred.

Machine check exceptions (MCEs) can occur for a variety of reasons ranging from undesired or out-of-spec voltages from the power supply, from cosmic radiation flipping bits in memory DIMMs or the CPU, or from other miscellaneous faults, including faulty software triggering hardware errors.

## Installation
Install the  package. rasdaemon written by Mauro Carvalho Chehab is one of the tools to gather MCE information.

Previously, the task was performed by the  package. However, it has been deprecated, and Arch kernels are not even compiled with the necessary configuration option CONFIG_X86_MCELOG_LEGACY () now.

## Configuration
There are two systemd services that need to be started and enabled.  registers DIMM labels (from ) with EDAC drivers. On consumer-grade motherboards it usually logs a  error and does nothing.  runs as a daemon and logs RAS events to systemd journal.

See  and  for more information.

## Usage
You can use  and  to quickly glance at the recorded errors. Errors are logged to the journal as well as the sqlite database at .
The schema of the sqlite database is changing often; after deleting the sqlite database file, restarting the rasdaemon service will create a fresh sqlite database file with the correct schema.

## Hardware documentation
* AMD64 Architecture Programmer's Manual, Volume 2: System Programming
* BIOS and Kernel Developer's Guide for AMD Athlon™ 64 and AMD Opteron™ Processors
