# MantisBT

MantisBT (Mantis Bug Tracker) is a bug tracker written in PHP.
For a list of features, visit its website.

## Installation
Install the  package.

Choose your favorite web server and/or application server (such as UWSGI) for making the application available.

## Configuration
mantisbt has a decent administration guide, that can be followed for setting it up.

All configuration is exposed in .
* Setup a compatible DBMS and use the 'Database Configuration' section to connect mantisbt with it.
* The 'Anonymous Access / Signup' section needs special attention, if you are not planning on disabling CAPTCHAs for new signups (see #PHP extensions and #TTF fonts).
* If you want to use SMTP you can set it up in the 'Email Configuration' section. mantisbt defaults to a phpmailer setup, which has the downside of not reaching mail servers that use grey listing.

In any case, you will need to meet some requirements for mantisbt to work properly:

## PHP extensions
* mysqli (if you are using MySQL/MariaDB)
* gd (if you plan on using CAPTCHA for user signup)

## TTF fonts
* make sure to install a TrueTypeFont, that you would like to use for the creation of CAPTCHAs
* setup the paths and names of the fonts, you would like to use:

## Web server
## nginx + uwsgi
This example shows a basic setup using a subdomain for the bug tracker, with some handson redirects.
The below mentioned file needs of course to be sourced within .
For a subfolder-based setup for mantisbt, some modifications are needed.

{{hc|/etc/nginx/nginx.conf|
server {
  listen 80;
  listen server_name bugs.mydomain.org www.mydomain.org;
  return 301 https://bugs.mydomain.org$request_uri;
}
server {
  listen 443 ssl;
  listen [:::443 ssl;
  server_name www.bugs.mydomain.org;
  return 301 https://bugs.mydomain.org$request_uri;
}
server {
  listen 443 ssl;
  listen ssl;
  server_name bugs.mydomain.org;
  include tls.conf;
  root /usr/share/webapps/mantisbt;
  access_log /var/log/nginx/access.bugs.mydomain.log;
  error_log /var/log/nginx/error.bugs.mydomain.log;
  include letsencrypt-challenge.conf;

  location ~ ^/(admin|core|doc|lang) {
    deny all;
  }

  location / {
    index index.php;
    try_files $uri $uri/ @mantisbt;
  }

  location @mantisbt {
    include uwsgi_params;
    uwsgi_modifier1 14;
    uwsgi_pass unix:/run/uwsgi/mantisbt.sock;
  }

  location ~  \.php?$ {
    include uwsgi_params;
    uwsgi_modifier1 14;
    uwsgi_pass unix:/run/uwsgi/mantisbt.sock;
  }

  # Deny serving files beginning with a dot, but allow letsencrypt acme-challenge
  location ~ /\.(?!well-known/acme-challenge) {
    access_log off;
    log_not_found off;
    deny all;
  }
}

}}

UWSGI can be used to achieve a resource preserving setup with dedicated PHP settings.

If your (modified) versions of these files are in place, you should restart your nginx and start/enable a uwsgi socket for mantisbt using systemd.

## Database
After making the application available, go to  with a web browser to setup the database. Follow the instructions on that page and let mantisbt generate the tables.

{{Note| You have to modify your #Web server settings temporarily to be able to visit that page. Here this is shown according to the example of using #nginx + uwsgi.
{{hc|/etc/nginx/nginx.conf|
  location ~ ^/(core|doc|lang) {
    deny all;
  }

}}
}}

## Administrator
The initial account generated by mantisbt is called administrator and has the password root.

## Usage
mantisbt should be all setup now. The administrator user is able to create new projects and give user rights to signed up users.
