# Nushell

nushell is a new type of shell. It has native support for structured and typed data, such as arrays, tables, records, numeric/boolean types, etc., and offers syntax and built-ins that make it easy to query, filter, sort, transform, convert, and otherwise manipulate various data types in a shell-like workflow, and supports taking input and producing output in many builtin or user-defined formats.

## Installation
Install the  package. You can then start nushell:

 $ nu

## Features
## Structured data support
Built-ins in nushell understand and output complex data types. For example, the  builtin outputs an array of items representing files, which have attributes like , ,  (, , , etc.), , etc.

In addition, many built-ins are offered for querying and manipulating data, as data - not as text like in traditional shell, while still having a shell-like workflow. For example, the  builtin can filter the contents of an array or table:

 > ls | where type == file | where size > 10mb

Since it filters data received via its "stdin" and produces it via its "stdout", multiple filters can be chained like above. Another example:

 > ls | where type == file | get size | math sum

The  builtin can be used access an attribute from an object. In this example, we are feeding it an array of objects via stdin, so it fetches the  property of each element in the array, which produces an array of numeric values. Finally, we feed that array to  which calculates their sum.

## Output
nushell has versatile output features. Right out of the box, it boasts a modern look with colors, ASCII art, and detailed error messages.

## Output as text
By default, the output of commands like  (which as we said produces an array of structured objects) is displayed as a colored text table with enumerated rows, where each file is a row and each attribute is a column. Example:

Behavior depends on configuration.

{{hc|> $env.config.hooks.display_output|2=
 if (term size).columns >= 100 { table -e } else { table }
}}
## Output in data formats
Data can also be output in any various data formats, including JSON, YAML, TOML, HTML, XML, SQL, CSV, Markdown tables, and others. The user can also define their own custom viewers to support arbitrary data types.

To output data in a given format, simply pipe the data to :

To save the output of a command in a file, pipe it to the  builtin:

 > ls | to json | save my-file.json

If the output file already exists,  will refuse to overwrite it. You can force overwriting files using the  switch.

Note that nushell defaults to producing pretty-printed JSON. To output JSON without pretty-printing, use .

See  for a list of supported formats.

## Error output
nushell prints colorized and detailed error messages that pinpoint the exact source of the error and suggest solutions. Example error message:

## Input
## Input from data files
nushell has native support for reading data in various formats, including JSON, YAML, TOML, SQL, HTML/XML, and others, allowing the user to utilize its powerful data querying and manipulation capabilities on data read from any file format. The user can also add support for new formats by adding plugins.

Data is read from files using the  builtin. For example, assuming the following file

Using open would produce the following:

## Input from external programs
For external programs, which typically produce their output as plain text, nushell offers the ability to parse their output and convert it into a structured datatype, so that the user can utilize nushell's full native data processing capabilities even on arbitrary output generated by agnostic programs.

## Using parse with regular expression
Parsing external program output can be easily performed using the  builtin. One typical workflow is using the  switch, which tells  to use a regular expression for extracting fields out of each line of text in the input. For example, to parse the output of pacman's  command, one might do something like this:

 > pacman -Si rclone | parse -r '(?P.*\w) +: (?P.+)'
 ╭────┬────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────╮
 │  # │      name      │                  value                  │
 ├────┼────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
 │  0 │ Repository     │ extra                                   │
 │  1 │ Name           │ rclone                                  │
 │  2 │ Version        │ 1.72.1-1                                │
 │  3 │ Description    │ rsync for cloud storage                 │
 │  4 │ Architecture   │ x86_64                                  │
 │  5 │ URL            │ https://github.com/rclone/rclone        │
 │  6 │ Licenses       │ MIT                                     │
 │  7 │ Groups         │ None                                    │
 │  8 │ Provides       │ None                                    │
 │  9 │ Depends On     │ glibc                                   │
 │ 10 │ Optional Deps  │ fuse3: for rclone mount                 │
 │ 11 │ Conflicts With │ None                                    │
 │ 12 │ Replaces       │ None                                    │
 │ 13 │ Download Size  │ 25.99 MiB                               │
 │ 14 │ Installed Size │ 98.07 MiB                               │
 │ 15 │ Packager       │ T.J. Townsend  │
 │ 16 │ Build Date     │ Wed Dec 10 18:03:32 2025                │
 │ 17 │ Validated By   │ SHA-256 Sum  Signature                  │
 ╰────┴────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────╯

nushell uses a Perl-like regular expression syntax, which is provided by the Regex crate (of the Rust programming language). The syntax is described in the crate's documentation.

## Using parse with template string
Another way, which does not require regular expression knowledge, is by omitting the  switch and providing  with a template string. However, depending on the case, it may necessitate extra steps for pre- and post-processsing the results. For example:

 > pacman -Si just | lines | parse '{field} : {value}' | str trim

Here we performed the same task as the above, but with three differences. Aside from using a template string rather than regular expression (i.e. without the  switch), the first notable difference is that when  is given a template strings, it acts on the entirety of its input rather than on each line in it. So in order to parse the input on a per-line basis, we must first split it into an array of lines using the  builtin.

The second difference is that template strings do not automatically trim surplus whitespace, which results in the matched fields containing all extra whitespace surrounding them, so we had to post-process the output with , which conveniently acts on all fields for all items in the provided array.

## Data manipulation
## Conversion
The combination of its  and  builtins allow it to be easily used to convert data files across any supported formats. For example:

The data can then be freely manipulated or converted by piping it to other commands. For example:

 > open movies.yaml | first 2 | to json --raw
 of the Rings","genre":"Action","Fantasy"}
 > open movies.yaml | first 2 | to json --raw | save movies.json
 > cat movies.json
 (same output as above)

## Comparison with traditional shells
nushell is not a POSIX shell, and has significant differences from traditional/POSIX-compatible shells in various ways, including its syntax, supported builtins, the way builtins work, the command-line options they accept, the type of data they consume and produce, and so on.

## Syntax
Redirecting output to a file cannot be done using  like in other shells (as it has greater-than meaning).

So rather than:

 ls > file.txt

which is an error, use e.g.:

 ls | get name | save file.txt

Nushell's redirection syntax is e.g.  (abbreviated as ), , .
It can be used directly in the former example above, if system's  command instead of internal one is used, by prefixing with :

 ^ls o> file.txt
