# Persistent block device naming

This article describes how to use persistent names for your block devices. This has been made possible by the introduction of udev and has some advantages over bus-based naming. If your machine has more than one drive sharing a naming scheme, the order in which their corresponding device nodes are added is arbitrary. This may result in block device names (e.g.  and ,  and ,  and ) switching around on each boot, culminating in an unbootable system, kernel panic, or a block device disappearing. Persistent naming solves these issues.

## Persistent naming methods
There are different schemes providing persistent naming managed by udev.

*  provides four by default: by-label, by-uuid, by-id and by-path. For disks with a GUID Partition Table (GPT), there are two additional schemes—by-partlabel and by-partuuid.
*  provides by-designator and gpt-auto for setups compatible with GPT partition automounting.

The directories in  are created and destroyed dynamically, depending on whether there are devices in them.

The following sections describe what the different persistent naming methods are and how they are used.

The lsblk command can be used for viewing graphically the first persistent schemes:

For those using GPT, use the  command instead. The latter is more convenient for scripts, but more difficult to read.

## by-label
Almost every file system type can have a label. All your volumes that have one are listed in the  directory.

Most file systems support setting the label upon file system creation, see the man page of the relevant  utility. For some file systems it is also possible to change the labels. Following are some methods for changing labels on common file systems:

; btrfs :  (use the mountpoint of the device if already mounted) using
; crypto_LUKS (LUKS2 only) :  using
; vfat/fat :  using
; exfat :  using
:  using  or
; ext2/3/4 :  using
; f2fs :  using
:  using
; jfs :  using
; ntfs :  using
; reiserfs :  using
; swap :  using
; udf :  using
; xfs :  (use the mountpoint of the device if already mounted) using

The label of a device can be obtained with lsblk:

Or with blkid:

## by-uuid
UUID is a mechanism to give each filesystem a unique identifier. These identifiers are generated by filesystem utilities (e.g. ) when the device gets formatted and are designed so that collisions are unlikely. All GNU/Linux filesystems (including swap and LUKS headers of raw encrypted devices) support UUID. FAT, exFAT and NTFS filesystems do not support UUID, but are still listed in  with a shorter UID (unique identifier):

The UUID of a device can be obtained with lsblk:

Or with blkid:

The advantage of using the UUID method is that it is much less likely that name collisions occur than with labels. Further, it is generated automatically on creation of the filesystem. It will, for example, stay unique even if the device is plugged into another system (which may perhaps have a device with the same label).

The disadvantage is that UUIDs make long code lines hard to read and break formatting in many configuration files (e.g. fstab or crypttab). Also every time a volume is reformatted a new UUID is generated and configuration files have to get manually adjusted.

## by-id and by-path
 creates a unique name depending on the hardware serial number,  depending on the shortest physical path (according to sysfs). Both contain strings to indicate which subsystem they belong to (i.e.  for , and  for ), so they are linked to the hardware controlling the device. This implies different levels of persistence: the  will already change when the device is plugged into a different port of the controller, the  will change when the device is plugged into a port of a hardware controller subject to another subsystem. Thus, both are not suitable to achieve persistent naming tolerant to hardware changes.

However, both provide important information to find a particular device in a large hardware infrastructure. For example, if you do not manually assign persistent labels ( or ) and keep a directory with hardware port usage,  and  can be used to find a particular device.[https://linuxshellaccount.blogspot.in/2008/09/how-to-easily-find-wwns-of-qlogic-hba.html ==== World Wide Name ====

 also creates World Wide Name (WWN) links of storage devices that support it. Unlike other  links, WWNs are fully persistent and will not change depending on the used subsystem.

SATA and SAS devices have a  prefix while NVMe devices use a different WWN format and are prefixed with .[https://github.com/systemd/systemd/pull/3136

{{hc|$ ls -l --time-style+ /dev/disk/by-id/{wwn-,nvme-eui.}*|
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 13  /dev/disk/by-id/nvme-eui.002538570142d716 -> ../../nvme1n1
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 15  /dev/disk/by-id/nvme-eui.002538570142d716-part1 -> ../../nvme1n1p1
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 15  /dev/disk/by-id/nvme-eui.002538570142d716-part2 -> ../../nvme1n1p2
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 13  /dev/disk/by-id/nvme-eui.e8238fa6bf530001001b448b4566aa1a -> ../../nvme0n1
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 15  /dev/disk/by-id/nvme-eui.e8238fa6bf530001001b448b4566aa1a-part1 -> ../../nvme0n1p1
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 15  /dev/disk/by-id/nvme-eui.e8238fa6bf530001001b448b4566aa1a-part2 -> ../../nvme0n1p2
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10  /dev/disk/by-id/wwn-0x60015ee0000b237f -> ../../sda
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10  /dev/disk/by-id/wwn-0x60015ee0000b237f-part1 -> ../../sda1
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10  /dev/disk/by-id/wwn-0x60015ee0000b237f-part2 -> ../../sda2
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10  /dev/disk/by-id/wwn-0x60015ee0000b237f-part3 -> ../../sda3
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10  /dev/disk/by-id/wwn-0x60015ee0000b237f-part4 -> ../../sda4
}}

## by-partlabel
GPT partition labels can be defined in the header of the partition entry on GPT disks.

This method is very similar to the filesystem labels, except the partition labels do not get affected if the file system on the partition is changed.

All partitions that have partition labels are listed in the  directory.

The partition label of a device can be obtained with lsblk:

Or with blkid:

## by-partuuid
Like GPT partition labels, GPT partition UUIDs are defined in the partition entry on GPT disks.

MBR does not support partition UUIDs, but Linuxand software using libblkid[https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/utils/util-linux/util-linux.git/commit/?id=d67cc2889a0527b26d7bb8c76f2acac46751d673 (e.g. udevhttps://github.com/systemd/systemd/pull/3293) are capable of generating pseudo PARTUUIDs for MBR partitions. The format is , where  is a zero-filled 32-bit MBR disk signature, and  is a zero-filled partition number in hexadecimal form. Unlike a regular PARTUUID of a GPT partition, MBR's pseudo PARTUUID can change if the partition number changes.

The dynamic directory is similar to other methods and, like filesystem UUIDs, using UUIDs is preferred over labels.

The partition UUID of a device can be obtained with lsblk:

Or with blkid:

## by-designator and gpt-auto
If all prerequisites of systemd-gpt-auto-generator are met, udev creates symlinks in  based on the partition type. The links are named: , , , , , , etc. See  for a full list.

For LUKS encrypted partitions, the aforementioned links will point to the unlocked/mapped volumes and additional links with a  suffix will point to the encrypted partitions. As long as the LUKS device mapper name matches a designator, links to unlocked volumes will be created even for encrypted partitions on other disks, but  suffixed links will not be created in this case.

The  symlink points to the root volume block device. If the root partition is encrypted with LUKS,  will point to the unlocked/mapped volume and  will point to the encrypted partition.

## Using persistent naming
There are various applications that can be configured using persistent naming. Following are some examples of how to configure them.

## fstab
See the main article: fstab#Identifying file systems.

## Kernel parameters
To use persistent names in kernel parameters, the following prerequisites must be met. On a standard installation following the installation guide both prerequisites are met:

* You are using an initramfs image that has udev in it.
* For mkinitcpio, enable either the  or  hook in

The location of the root filesystem is given by the parameter  on the kernel command line. The kernel command line is configured from the boot loader, see Kernel parameters#Boot loader configuration. To change to persistent device naming, only change the parameters which specify block devices, e.g.  and , while leaving other parameters as is. Various naming schemes are supported:

Persistent device naming using label and the  format, in this example  is the LABEL of the root file system.

 root="LABEL=Arch Linux"

Persistent device naming using UUID and the  format, in this example  is the UUID of the root file system.

 root=UUID=0a3407de-014b-458b-b5c1-848e92a327a3

Persistent device naming using disk id and the  path format, in this example  is the id of the root partition.

 root=/dev/disk/by-id/wwn-0x60015ee0000b237f-part2

Persistent device naming using GPT partition UUID and the  format, in this example  is the PARTUUID of the root partition.

 root=PARTUUID=98a81274-10f7-40db-872a-03df048df366

Persistent device naming using GPT partition label and the  format, in this example  is the PARTLABEL of the root partition.

 root="PARTLABEL=GNU/Linux"

When using GPT partition automounting, the  parameter can be omitted entirely. If an explicit configuration is desired, use:

 root=dissect
