# Sawfish

Sawfish is a highly customizable window manager. Formerly it has been the standard Window manager of the GNOME desktop, but because of a change of maintainership this is no longer true. This article will show you how to install and configure it for standalone use (without GNOME).

## Installation
Install the  package.

## Starting
Start  with xinit.

## Customization
Out-of-the box Sawfish provides a menu accessible by clicking Mouse-2 (middle button) on the root window. From there, you can launch the customization app.

If you change any settings, they are stored in .

## Themes
You can select a window theme from the customization app. There is a small bug: if the theme is parametrizable, its configuration window will only appear after you restart the customization app.

## Adding new
Create the directory  and drop there any theme files. You do not need to uncompress them. There are 500+ themes to choose from in the Sawfish site.

## Menus
Arch does not provide an automatic menu generator for Sawfish, but you can generate the menus using the XFCE4 ones. Here are the necessary steps:

Create the directory . This is where custom Sawfish scripts are stored; the menu will be one of them.
Install , copy the xslt stylesheet example, paste it into a file named .
Now you need a XFCE4 menu. You may have one already or you can generate one with menumaker or xdg_menu.
* If want to use :
 $ mmaker -c xfce4 | xsltproc xfce4-menu-to-sawfish.xslt - > ~/.sawfish/lisp/arch-menu.jl
* If you want to use :
 $ xdg_menu --format xfce4 --root-menu /etc/xdg/menus/arch-applications.menu | xsltproc xfce4-menu-to-sawfish.xslt - > ~/.sawfish/lisp/arch-menu.jl

Now you have a script  that defines a variable arch-menu with a list of your applications. You need to link to it from the root menu. You need to write the code for that to happen in . So, start your favorite editor, create , and type:

 ;;; sawfish configuration file
 ; 1. Load defaults
 (require 'sawfish-defaults)
 ; 2. Load autogenerated arch-menu
 (require 'arch-menu)
 ; 3. Replace Sawfish's apps-menu with ours
 (setq apps-menu arch-menu)

Restart Sawfish to effect the changes.

## Menu example
## Additional resources
* Sawfish wiki - Official website
