# X10

X10 is a radio remote compatible with LIRC.

## Install LIRC
Install the  package.

To support power actions directly from Kodi (like shutdown option)  needs to be installed.

## Blacklist not working module
For some reason udev loads the wrong kernel module for this radio remote, so you need to blacklist it. This is done in

Errors in dmesg with the wrong module:
 ati_remote 1-1.1:1.0: Unknown input from channel 0x00: data 72,9d
 ati_remote: Weird data, len=5 20 fa 5b 65 b6 20 ...
 ati_remote: Weird data, len=5 20 fa db 5d b6 00 ...

To blacklist the module create the following file:

## Create /etc/lirc/lircd.conf
This maps the keys from your remote to strings you can use for programs like mplayer.

It can automatically generated or copied from one of the provided examples in .

To generate your own  use:

 # irrecord -H atilibusb --disable-namespace lircd.conf

More details are available at LIRC#Creating remote configuration.

Here is one for a Medion X10 Remote:

Alternate config file:

## Edit /etc/conf.d/lircd.conf
Recent versions of LIRC drop support for the  kernel module and so it is now necessary to use the atilibusb driver.

Simply add  to the  field so that the file looks like this:
 # Parameters for lirc daemon
 #

 LIRC_DEVICE="/dev/lirc0"
 LIRC_DRIVER="atilibusb"
 LIRC_EXTRAOPTS=""
 LIRC_CONFIGFILE=""

## Starting lircd
Start/enable .

## Example mplayer config
 is the default MPlayer filename for the LIRC config, see  to change this.

Change in :
{{bc|1=
begin
     button = VOLUME_UP       #VOLUME_UP is the string defined in /etc/lirc/lircd.conf
     prog = mplayer
     config = volume 1         #this is mplayers internal command, see "mplayer -input cmdlist" for more
end

begin
    button = VOLUME_DOWN
    prog = mplayer
    config = volume -1
end

begin
	button = RIGHT
	prog = mplayer
	config = seek +1
end

begin
	button = LEFT
	prog = mplayer
	config = seek -1
end

begin
	button = UP
	prog = mplayer
	config = seek +50
end

begin
	button = DOWN
	prog = mplayer
	config = seek -50
end

begin
	button = PLAY
	prog = mplayer
	config = pause
end

begin
	button = PAUSE
	prog = mplayer
	config = pause
end
#show elapse/total time in the upper left corner
#Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20200808073444/http://prasinos.eu/articles/mplayer-lirc-elapsed-time
begin
	button = GUIDE
	prog = mplayer
	config = osd_show_property_text "${time_pos} / ${length}"
end
}}

## Kodi
Please see Kodi#Using a remote control.

The below example  file is compatible with the alternate  posted above.
