## Chapter 9. Known Issues

The following problems still exist in this release and are in the process of being resolved.

**Known Issues**

Cache Aliasing
Cache aliasing occurs when multiple mappings to a physical page of memory have conflicting caching states, such as cached and uncached. Due to these conflicting states, data in that physical page may become corrupted when the processor's cache is flushed. If that page is being used for DMA by a driver such as NVIDIA's graphics driver, this can lead to hardware stability problems and system lockups.

NVIDIA has encountered bugs with some Linux kernel versions that lead to cache aliasing. Although some systems will run perfectly fine when cache aliasing occurs, other systems will experience severe stability problems, including random lockups. Users experiencing stability problems due to cache aliasing will benefit from updating to a kernel that does not cause cache aliasing to occur.

Valgrind
The NVIDIA OpenGL implementation makes use of self modifying code. To force Valgrind to retranslate this code after a modification you must run using the Valgrind command line option:

``` screen
--smc-check=all
```

Without this option Valgrind may execute incorrect code causing incorrect behavior and reports of the form:

``` screen
==30313== Invalid write of size 4
```

Driver fails to initialize when MSI interrupts are enabled
The Linux NVIDIA driver uses Message Signaled Interrupts (MSI) by default. This provides compatibility and scalability benefits, mainly due to the avoidance of IRQ sharing.

Some systems have been seen to have problems supporting MSI, while working fine with virtual wire interrupts. These problems manifest as an inability to start X with the NVIDIA driver, or CUDA initialization failures. The NVIDIA driver will then report an error indicating that the NVIDIA kernel module does not appear to be receiving interrupts generated by the GPU.

Problems have also been seen with suspend/resume while MSI is enabled. All known problems have been fixed, but if you observe problems with suspend/resume that you did not see with previous drivers, disabling MSI may help you.

NVIDIA is working on a long-term solution to improve the driver's out of the box compatibility with system configurations that do not fully support MSI.

MSI interrupts can be disabled via the NVIDIA kernel module parameter "NVreg_EnableMSI=0". This can be set on the command line when loading the module, or more appropriately via your distribution's kernel module configuration files (such as those under /etc/modprobe.d/).

Console restore behavior
The Linux NVIDIA driver uses the nvidia-modeset module for console restore whenever it can. Currently, the improved console restore mechanism is used on systems that boot with the UEFI Graphics Output Protocol driver, and on systems that use supported VESA linear graphical modes. Note that VGA text, color index, planar, banked, and some linear modes cannot be supported, and will use the older console restore method instead.

When the new console restore mechanism is in use and the nvidia-modeset module is initialized (e.g. because an X server is running on a different VT, nvidia-persistenced is running, or the nvidia_drm module is loaded with the `modeset=1` parameter), then nvidia-modeset will respond to hot plug events by displaying the console on as many displays as it can. Note that to save power, it may not display the console on all connected displays.

Vulkan and device enumeration
Starting with the X.Org X server version 1.20.7, it is possible to enumerate all the NVIDIA devices in the system if the application is able to open a connection to the X server. However, such applications will only be able to create an Xlib or XCB swapchain on the device driving the X screen. Such a device can be identified by using the vkGetPhysicalDeviceSurfaceSupportKHR() API.

Prior to the X.Org X server version 1.20.7, it is not possible to enumerate multiple devices if one of them will be used to present to an X11 swapchain. It is still possible to enumerate multiple devices even if one of them is driving an X screen, if the devices will be used for Vulkan offscreen rendering or presenting to a display swapchain. For that, make sure that the application cannot open a display connection to an X server by, for example, unsetting the DISPLAY environment variable.

Restricting access to GPU performance counters
NVIDIA Developer Tools allow developers to debug, profile, and develop software for NVIDIA GPUs. GPU performance counters are integral to these tools. By default, access to the GPU performance counters is restricted to root, and other users with the CAP_SYS_ADMIN capability, for security reasons. If developers require access to the NVIDIA Developer Tools, a system administrator can accept the security risk and allow access to users without the CAP_SYS_ADMIN capability.

Wider access to GPU performance counters can be granted by setting the kernel module parameter "NVreg_RestrictProfilingToAdminUsers=0" in the nvidia.ko kernel module. This can be set on the command line when loading the module, or more appropriately via your distribution's kernel module configuration files (such as those under /etc/modprobe.d/).

Driver fails to initialize with some versions of RHEL 8
Some versions of Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8 kernels have a bug that causes driver initialization to fail with an error such as:

``` screen
    NVRM: Xid (PCI:0000:09:00): 79, pid=2172, GPU has fallen off the bus.
    NVRM: GPU 0000:09:00.0: GPU has fallen off the bus.
    NVRM: GPU 0000:09:00.0: RmInitAdapter failed! (0x26:0x65:1239)
    NVRM: GPU 0000:09:00.0: rm_init_adapter failed, device minor number 0
```

See the Red Hat knowledge base article https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5825061 to find the specific affected and fixed kernel versions.

Driver fails to load on Linux kernel versions 5.18 through 5.18.19 with CONFIG_X86_KERNEL_IBT enabled
The NVIDIA driver fails to load on IBT (Indirect Branch Tracking) supported CPUs running Linux kernel versions 5.18 to 5.18.19, when IBT is enabled, with the following error:

``` screen
        error "traps: Missing ENDBR:"
```

This issue is not seen with Linux kernels having the following commit:

``` screen
         commit 3c6f9f77e618 (objtool: Rework ibt and extricate from stack validation)
```

The aforementioned commit is available in Linux kernel versions 5.19 and later. The NVIDIA driver's IBT support works with Linux kernels containing commit 3c6f9f77e618 (5.19 and later). Please use the kernel boot parameter "ibt=off" as a workaround on kernels without that commit.

Notebooks
If you are using a notebook see the "Known Notebook Issues" in [Chapter 16, *Configuring a Notebook*](configlaptop.html "Chapter 16. Configuring a Notebook").

Texture seams in Quake 3 engine
Many games based on the Quake 3 engine set their textures to use the `GL_CLAMP` clamping mode when they should be using `GL_CLAMP_TO_EDGE`. This was an oversight made by the developers because some legacy NVIDIA GPUs treat the two modes as equivalent. The result is seams at the edges of textures in these games. To mitigate this, older versions of the NVIDIA display driver remap `GL_CLAMP` to `GL_CLAMP_TO_EDGE` internally to emulate the behavior of the older GPUs, but this workaround has been disabled by default. To re-enable it, uncheck the "Use Conformant Texture Clamping" checkbox in nvidia-settings before starting any affected applications.

FSAA
When FSAA is enabled (the \_\_GL_FSAA_MODE environment variable is set to a value that enables FSAA and a multisample visual is chosen), the rendering may be corrupted when resizing the window.

libGL DSO finalizer and pthreads
When a multithreaded OpenGL application exits, it is possible for libGL's DSO finalizer (also known as the destructor, or "\_fini") to be called while other threads are executing OpenGL code. The finalizer needs to free resources allocated by libGL. This can cause problems for threads that are still using these resources. Setting the environment variable "\_\_GL_NO_DSO_FINALIZER" to "1" will work around this problem by forcing libGL's finalizer to leave its resources in place. These resources will still be reclaimed by the operating system when the process exits. Note that the finalizer is also executed as part of dlclose(3), so if you have an application that dlopens(3) and dlcloses(3) libGL repeatedly, "\_\_GL_NO_DSO_FINALIZER" will cause libGL to leak resources until the process exits. Using this option can improve stability in some multithreaded applications, including Java3D applications.

Thread cancellation
Canceling a thread (see pthread_cancel(3)) while it is executing in the OpenGL driver causes undefined behavior. For applications that wish to use thread cancellation, it is recommended that threads disable cancellation using pthread_setcancelstate(3) while executing OpenGL or GLX commands.

This section describes problems that will not be fixed. Usually, the source of the problem is beyond the control of NVIDIA. Following is the list of problems:

**Problems that Will Not Be Fixed**

NV-CONTROL versions 1.8 and 1.9
Version 1.8 of the NV-CONTROL X Extension introduced target types for setting and querying attributes as well as receiving event notification on targets. Targets are objects like X Screens, GPUs and RTX PRO Sync devices. Previously, all attributes were described relative to an X Screen. These new bits of information (target type and target id) were packed in a non-compatible way in the protocol stream such that addressing X Screen 1 or higher would generate an X protocol error when mixing NV-CONTROL client and server versions.

This packing problem has been fixed in the NV-CONTROL 1.10 protocol, making it possible for the older (1.7 and prior) clients to communicate with NV-CONTROL 1.10 servers. Furthermore, the NV-CONTROL 1.10 client library has been updated to accommodate the target protocol packing bug when communicating with a 1.8 or 1.9 NV-CONTROL server. This means that the NV-CONTROL 1.10 client library should be able to communicate with any version of the NV-CONTROL server.

NVIDIA recommends that NV-CONTROL client applications relink with version 1.10 or later of the NV-CONTROL client library (libXNVCtrl.a, in the nvidia-settings-580.105.08.tar.bz2 tarball). The version of the client library can be determined by checking the NV_CONTROL_MAJOR and NV_CONTROL_MINOR definitions in the accompanying nv_control.h.

The only web released NVIDIA Linux driver that is affected by this problem (i.e., the only driver to use either version 1.8 or 1.9 of the NV-CONTROL X extension) is 1.0-8756.

CPU throttling reducing memory bandwidth on IGP systems
For some models of CPU, the CPU throttling technology may affect not only CPU core frequency, but also memory frequency/bandwidth. On systems using integrated graphics, any reduction in memory bandwidth will affect the GPU as well as the CPU. This can negatively affect applications that use significant memory bandwidth, such as video decoding using VDPAU, or certain OpenGL operations. This may cause such applications to run with lower performance than desired.

To work around this problem, NVIDIA recommends configuring your CPU throttling implementation to avoid reducing memory bandwidth. This may be as simple as setting a certain minimum frequency for the CPU.

Depending on your operating system and/or distribution, this may be as simple as writing to a configuration file in the /sys or /proc filesystems, or other system configuration file. Please read, or search the Internet for, documentation regarding CPU throttling on your operating system.

VDPAU initialization failures on supported GPUs
If VDPAU gives the VDP_STATUS_NO_IMPLEMENTATION error message on a GPU which was labeled or specified as supporting PureVideo or PureVideo HD, one possible reason is a hardware defect. After ruling out any other software problems, NVIDIA recommends returning the GPU to the manufacturer for a replacement.

Some applications, such as Quake 3, crash after querying the OpenGL extension string
Some applications have bugs that are triggered when the extension string is longer than a certain size. As more features are added to the driver, the length of this string increases and can trigger these sorts of bugs.

You can limit the extensions listed in the OpenGL extension string to the ones that appeared in a particular version of the driver by setting the `__GL_ExtensionStringVersion` environment variable to a particular version number. For example,

``` screen
__GL_ExtensionStringVersion=17700 quake3
```

will run Quake 3 with the extension string that appeared in the 177.\* driver series. Limiting the size of the extension string can work around this sort of application bug.

gnome-shell doesn't update until a window is moved
Versions of libcogl prior to 1.10.x have a bug which causes glBlitFramebuffer() calls used to update the window to be clipped by a 0x0 scissor (see [GNOME bug #690451](https://bugzilla.gnome.org/show_bug.cgi?id=690451) for more details). To work around this bug, the scissor test can be disabled by setting the `__GL_ConformantBlitFramebufferScissor` environment variable to 0. Note this version of the NVIDIA driver comes with an application profile which automatically disables this test if libcogl is detected in the process.

Some X servers ignore the RandR transform filter during a modeset request
The RandR layer of the X server attempts to ignore redundant RRSetCrtcConfig requests. If the only property changed by an RRSetCrtcConfig request is the transform filter, some X servers will ignore the request as redundant. This can be worked around by also changing other properties, such as the mode, transformation matrix, etc.
