[] This article is a [stub](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Category:Stub "Category:Stub"). Please help out by [expanding it](https://wiki.gentoo.org/index.php?title=F3&action=edit) - [how to get started](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Gentoo_Wiki:Contributor%27s_guide "Gentoo Wiki:Contributor's guide").

**Resources**

[[]][Home](http://oss.digirati.com.br/f3/)

[[]][GitHub](https://github.com/AltraMayor/f3)

F3 (**F**ight **F**lash **F**raud, or **F**ight **F**ake **F**lash) is an open source, cross platform H2testw clone. It fights fraud by creating a series of files to readable portions of flash memory and does calculations on current read/write speed. It can be useful in determining how much usable storage is actually present on a a device, despite what is on the devices label.

## Contents

-   [[1] [Installation]](#Installation)
    -   [[1.1] [USE flags]](#USE_flags)
    -   [[1.2] [Emerge]](#Emerge)
-   [[2] [Usage]](#Usage)
    -   [[2.1] [Test device is valid]](#Test_device_is_valid)
    -   [[2.2] [Test write speeds]](#Test_write_speeds)
    -   [[2.3] [Test read speeds]](#Test_read_speeds)
-   [[3] [Removal]](#Removal)
    -   [[3.1] [Unmerge]](#Unmerge)
-   [[4] [See also]](#See_also)

## [Installation]

### [USE flags]

### [USE flags for] [sys-block/f3](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-block/f3) [[]] [Utilities to detect broken or counterfeit flash storage]

  ------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [`extra`](https://packages.gentoo.org/useflags/extra)   Build the additional f3probe, f3brew and f3fix utility (requires sys-block/parted and virtual/udev)
  ------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Data provided by the [Gentoo Package Database](https://packages.gentoo.org) · Last update: 2025-06-30 12:51] [[More information about USE flags](/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Working/USE)]

### [Emerge]

`root `[`#`]`emerge --ask sys-block/f3`

## [Usage]

### [Test device is valid]

To probe a block device for counterfeit flash memory use f3probe utility. In case of faked size resulting output will show command to fix your device, something like this:

`root `[`#`]`f3probe --time-ops /dev/sde`

    F3 probe 9.0
    Copyright (C) 2010 Digirati Internet LTDA.
    This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.

    WARNING: Probing normally takes from a few seconds to 15 minutes, but
             it can take longer. Please be patient.

    Probe finished, recovering blocks... Done

    Bad news: The device `/dev/sde' is a counterfeit of type limbo

    You can "fix" this device using the following command:
    f3fix --last-sec=129724415 /dev/sde

    Device geometry:
                     *Usable* size: 61.86 GB (129724416 blocks)
                    Announced size: 976.56 GB (2048000000 blocks)
                            Module: 1.00 TB (2^40 Bytes)
            Approximate cache size: 511.00 MB (1046528 blocks), need-reset=no
               Physical block size: 512.00 Byte (2^9 Bytes)

    Probe time: 1:05:31
     Operation: total time / count = avg time
          Read: 1'13" / 3145858 = 23us
         Write: 1:04:15 / 7327309 = 526us
         Reset: 0us / 2 = 0us

\

### [Test write speeds]

In order to do a true read test, F3 must first create a series of [.hw2] files in the available free space on the device:

`root `[`#`]`f3write /path/to/mountpoint`

Depending on the size, free space, and write speed of the device, his could take quite a while. Whenever it is finished, it will be possible to test read speeds.

** Note**\
If the [f3write] command is run again it will delete the files it created during the first runtime and start over. Unless another verification of write speed is needed, it is better to test read speeds after the first invocation.

### [Test read speeds]

After the write test has finished, read speed can be tested using the following command:

`root `[`#`]`f3read /path/to/mountpoint`

F3 will read though the available [.hw2] files and calculate if there are any consistency errors. It will also calculate read speed. It is quite normal for read speed to be faster than write speed, especially on removable media.

## [Removal]

### [Unmerge]

`root `[`#`]`emerge --ask --depclean --verbose sys-block/f3`

## [See also]

-   [Hdparm](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Hdparm "Hdparm") --- a command-line utility to set and view ATA and SATA [hard disk drive](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/HDD "HDD") hardware parameters.