**Resources**

[[]][Home](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/)

[[]][Git repository browser](https://git.skarnet.org/cgi-bin/cgit.cgi/s6)

[[]][GitHub mirror](https://github.com/skarnet/s6)

[[]][Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S6_(software) "wikipedia:S6 (software)")

[[]][Package information](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6)

**s6** is a package that provides a [daemontools-inspired](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools "Daemontools") process supervision suite, a notification framework, a UNIX domain super-server, and tools for file descriptor holding and suidless privilege gain. It can be used as an init system component, and also as a helper for supervising [OpenRC](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/OpenRC "OpenRC") services. A high level overview of s6 is available [here](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/overview.html). The package\'s documentation is primarily provided in HTML format, and can be read on a text user interface using for example [[[www-client/links]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/www-client/links)[]]. However, a man page port of the s6 documentation, **app-misc/s6-man**, is available in the GURU repository.

## Contents

-   [[1] [Installation]](#Installation)
    -   [[1.1] [USE flags]](#USE_flags)
    -   [[1.2] [Emerge]](#Emerge)
-   [[2] [Configuration]](#Configuration)
    -   [[2.1] [Environment variables]](#Environment_variables)
    -   [[2.2] [Files]](#Files)
    -   [[2.3] [Service]](#Service)
        -   [[2.3.1] [OpenRC]](#OpenRC)
-   [[3] [Usage]](#Usage)
    -   [[3.1] [A note on execline]](#A_note_on_execline)
    -   [[3.2] [Process supervision]](#Process_supervision)
        -   [[3.2.1] [Querying and modifying supervised state]](#Querying_and_modifying_supervised_state)
        -   [[3.2.2] [Examples]](#Examples)
    -   [[3.3] [The logging chain]](#The_logging_chain)
    -   [[3.4] [The notification framework]](#The_notification_framework)
        -   [[3.4.1] [FIFO directories and related tools]](#FIFO_directories_and_related_tools)
        -   [[3.4.2] [s6-supervise\'s use of notification]](#s6-supervise.27s_use_of_notification)
        -   [[3.4.3] [Service readiness notification]](#Service_readiness_notification)
    -   [[3.5] [The UNIX domain super-server and related tools]](#The_UNIX_domain_super-server_and_related_tools)
    -   [[3.6] [Suidless privilege gain tools]](#Suidless_privilege_gain_tools)
    -   [[3.7] [The file descriptor holder and related tools]](#The_file_descriptor_holder_and_related_tools)
    -   [[3.8] [OpenRC\'s s6 integration feature]](#OpenRC.27s_s6_integration_feature)
    -   [[3.9] [Starting a supervision tree]](#Starting_a_supervision_tree)
        -   [[3.9.1] [From OpenRC]](#From_OpenRC)
        -   [[3.9.2] [From sysvinit]](#From_sysvinit)
    -   [[3.10] [s6 init with s6-rc]](#s6_init_with_s6-rc)
        -   [[3.10.1] [The boot sequence]](#The_boot_sequence)
        -   [[3.10.2] [Shutdown and reboot]](#Shutdown_and_reboot)
    -   [[3.11] [Compatibility scripts]](#Compatibility_scripts)
        -   [[3.11.1] [Service management]](#Service_management)
        -   [[3.11.2] [Runlevels]](#Runlevels)
-   [[4] [See also]](#See_also)
-   [[5] [External resources]](#External_resources)
-   [[6] [References]](#References)

## [Installation]

### [USE flags]

### [USE flags for] [sys-apps/s6](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6) [[]] [skarnet.org\'s small and secure supervision software suite]

  --------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------
  [`+execline`](https://packages.gentoo.org/useflags/+execline)   enable support for dev-lang/execline
  --------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------

[Data provided by the [Gentoo Package Database](https://packages.gentoo.org) · Last update: 2026-04-13 11:26] [[More information about USE flags](/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Working/USE)]

### [Emerge]

`root `[`#`]`emerge --ask sys-apps/s6`

## [Configuration]

### [Environment variables]

-   `UID` - The process\' user ID set by [s6-applyuidgid] when invoked with the `-U` option.
-   `GID` - The process\' group ID set by [s6-applyuidgid] when invoked with the `-U` option.
-   `GIDLIST` - The process\' supplementary group list set by [s6-applyuidgid] when invoked with the `-U` option. Must be a comma-separated list of numeric group IDs, without spaces.

### [Files]

-   [/run/openrc/s6-scan] - [s6-svscan]\'s scan directory when using OpenRC\'s [s6 integration feature](#s6integration).
-   [/var/svc.d] - Service directory repository searched by OpenRC when using the s6 integration feature.

### [Service]

#### [OpenRC]

Refer to [this section](#openrclaunch).

## [Usage]

### [A note on execline]

The author of s6 is also the author of [[[dev-lang/execline]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/dev-lang/execline)[]], a scripting language built around [chain loading](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools-encore#changingstate "Daemontools-encore")^[\[1\]](#cite_note-1)^. Execline aims to support the creation of lightweight and efficient scripts, by:

-   avoiding spawning and initializing a big command interpreter such as [sh]; and
-   simplifying parsing and doing it only once, when the script is read by the interpreter^[\[2\]](#cite_note-2)^.

[[[sys-apps/s6]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6)[]] depends on [[[dev-lang/execline]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/dev-lang/execline)[]] because some of its programs call execline programs or use the execline library, [libexecline]. However, s6 scripts don\'t need to use execline; they can use other command interpreters, such as [sh].

### [Process supervision]

For more in-depth information about the process supervision aspects of s6, see [daemontools-encore](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools-encore#Usage "Daemontools-encore"). s6 programs with functionality similar to a daemontools program have the daemontools name prefixed with **s6-**; the exceptions are [s6-log] (daemontools\' [multilog]) and [s6-setsid] (daemontools\' [pgrphack]).

Complete information about the following programs, directory structures and files can be found in [[[sys-apps/s6]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6)[]]\'s [/usr/share/doc/] subdirectory.

s6-supervise

[s6-supervise] takes the (absolute or relative to the working directory) pathname of a *service directory* (*servicedir*) as an argument. This directory must contain an executable file named [run], but it can also contain:

-   a regular file named [down];
-   a subdirectory (or symbolic link to a directory) named [log];
-   an executable file named [finish];
-   a regular file named [timeout-finish].

[finish] can be used to perform cleanup actions each time the supervised process terminates, possibly depending on its exit status information. [s6-supervise] calls [finish] with two arguments: firstly, the supervised process\' exit code, or **256** if it was killed by a signal; and secondly, the signal number if the supervised process was killed by a signal, or an undefined number otherwise.

[s6-supervise] sends the [finish] process a `SIGKILL` signal if it runs for too long, by default 5 seconds. An alternative value can be specified in the [timeout-finish] file\" an unsigned integer that specifies how many milliseconds the [finish] process is allowed to run before being killed.

[s6-supervise] makes its child process the leader of a new session using the POSIX `setsid()` call, unless the servicedir contains a regular file named [nosetsid]. In that case, the child process will run in [s6-supervise]\'s session instead. [s6-supervise] waits for a minimum of 1 second between two spawns of [run], so that it does not loop too quickly if the supervised process exits immediately. If [s6-supervise] receives a `SIGTERM`, it behaves as if an [s6-svc -dx] command naming the corresponding service directory had been used (see later); if it receives a `SIGHUP` signal, it behaves as if an [s6-svc -x] command naming the corresponding service directory had been used.

[s6-supervise] keeps control files in a subdirectory of the servicedir, [supervise]. If it finds a symbolic link to a directory with that name, [s6-supervise] will follow it and use that directory for its control files.

[s6-supervise] also uses a servicedir subdirectory named [event], for notifications about the supervised process\' state changes (see [the notification framework](#s6notification)). If this directory doesn\'t exist, [s6-supervise] will create it as a FIFO directory restricted to members of its effective group; if it does exist, including as a symlink to another directory, [s6-supervise] will use it as-is.

s6-svscan

[s6-svscan] supervises a collection of processes running in parallel, via a *scan directory* (*scandir*), which represents the supervision tree\'s root.

[s6-svscan] keeps control files in a subdirectory of the scandir, named [.s6-svscan]. If this subdirectory or any of its files doesn\'t exist when [s6-svscan] is invoked, they will be created. [s6-svscan] can be controlled by sending it signals (such as a `SIGALRM` to force a scan), or by using the [s6-svscanctl] program; [s6-svscanctl] communicates with [s6-svscan] using a FIFO in the [.s6-svscan] subdirectory, and accepts a scan directory pathname, together with options that specify what to do. Refer to the s6-svscanctl page in the documentation for details.

When [s6-svscan] performs a scan, it checks the scandir and launches an [s6-supervise] child process for each new servicedir it finds, or old servicedir for which it finds its [s6-supervise] process has exited. All services with a corresponding servicedir are considered *active*. If [s6-svscan] finds that there [s6-supervise] children without a corresponding servicedir, the service is not stopped, but considered *inactive*.

To support its role as process 1, [s6-svscan] performs a *reaper routine* each time it receives a `SIGCHLD` signal, i.e. it uses a POSIX `waitpid()` call for each child process that becomes a zombie, both the ones it has spawned itself, and the ones that were reparented to process 1 by the kernel because its parent process died. An [s6-svscanctl -z] command naming its scan directory can be used to force [s6-svscan] to perform its reaper routine.

[s6-svscan] program was written to be robust, and go out of its way to stay alive, even in dire situations, making it suitable for running as process 1 during most of a machine\'s uptime. However, the duties of process 1 vary widely during:

-   the machine\'s boot sequence;
-   its normal, stable \'up and running\' state;; and
-   its shutdown sequence.

The first and third cases are heavily system-dependent, so it is not possible to use a program designed to be as portable as possible^[\[3\]](#cite_note-3)^. Because of that, auxiliary and system-dependent programs, named *stage1 init* and *stage3 init* are used during the boot sequence and the shutdown sequence, respectively, to run as process 1, and [s6-svscan] is used the rest of the time. For details, see [s6 init with s6-rc](#init).

s6-svc

[s6-svc] controls supervised processes, and [s6-svstat] queries them for status information.

[s6-svc] takes a servicedir as an argument, together with options that various actions. Any additional servicedir after the first one will be ignored.

s6-svstat

[s6-svstat] takes a servicedir as an argument; any pathname after the first one will be ignored. Without options, or with only the `-n` option, [s6-svstat] prints a human-readable summary of all the available information on the service: for example, whether the supervised process is running (\"run\") or not (\"down\"), whether it is transitioning to the desired state or already there (\"want up\" or \"want down\"), how long it has been in the current state, and whether its current up or down status matches the presence or absence of a [down] file in the servicedir (\"normally up\" or \"normally down\"). It also shows if the supervised process is paused (because of a `SIGSTOP` signal).

s6-log

[s6-log] is the s6 logger program. It treats its argument as a *logging script* containing *directives*. For details, refer to the relevant page in [[[sys-apps/s6]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6)[]]\'s [/usr/share/doc/] subdirectory.

#### [Querying and modifying supervised state]

s6svok

[s6-svok] checks whether an [s6-supervise] process is currently running on the servicedir specified as an argument. Its exit status is **0** if there is one, and **1** if there isn\'t.

s6-svdt

[s6-svdt] takes a servicedir as an argumnet, and prints the corresponding service\'s death tally. For each recorded process termination, one line is printed.

s6-permafailon

[s6-permafailon] is a chain loading program that assumes that its working directory is a servicedir, and checks termination events in the corresponding death tally. If they match specified conditions, the program exits with code **125**,;otherwise, it executes the next program in the chain. This makes it suitable for use in [finish] files, to signal permanent failure to [s6-supervise] when certain conditions are met.

s6 also provides [chain loading](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools-encore#changingstate "Daemontools-encore") programs that can be used to modify a supervised process\' execution state: [s6-envdir], [s6-envuidgid], [s6-setlock], [s6-setuidgid], [s6-softlimit] and [s6-setsid]. There is also a generalized version of [s6-setuidgid], [s6-applyuidgid].

#### [Examples]

Refer to [the \"S6/examples\" page](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/examples#s6supervision "S6/examples") for a number of examples of s6 supervision tool usage.

### [The logging chain]

A supervision tree where all leaf processes have a logger can be arranged into a *logging chain*^[\[4\]](#cite_note-4)^, rather than the traditional syslog-based centralized approach^[\[5\]](#cite_note-5)^.

Since processes in a supervision tree are created using the POSIX `fork()` call, each of them will inherit [s6-svscan]\'s standard input, output and error. A logging chain arrangement is as follows:

-   Leaf processes should normally have a logger, so their standard output and error connect to their logger\'s standard input. Therefore, all their messages are collected and stored in dedicated, per-service logs by their logger. Some programs might need to be invoked with special options to make them send messages to their standard error, and redirection of standard error to standard output (i.e. **2\>&1** in a shell script or **fdmove -c 2 1** in an execline script) must be performed in the servicedir\'s [run] file.
-   Leaf processes with a controlling terminal are an exception: their standard input, output and error connect to the terminal.
-   [s6-supervise], the loggers, and leaf processes that don\'t have a logger for some reason, inherit their standard input, output and error from [s6-svscan], so their messages are sent wherever the ones from [s6-svscan] are.
-   Leaf processes that still unavoidably report their messages using `syslog()` have them collected and logged by a (possibly supervised) syslog server.

[s6 and s6-rc-based init](#init) is arranged in such a way that [s6-svscan]\'s messages are collected by a *catch-all logger*, and that logger\'s standard error is redirected to [/dev/console].

### [The notification framework]

*Notification* is a mechanism by which a process can become instantly aware that a certain event has happened, as opposed to the process actively and periodically checking whether it happened (which is called *polling*)^[\[6\]](#cite_note-6)^. The s6 package provides a general notification framework that doesn\'t rely on a long-lived process (e.g. a bus daemon), so that it can be integrated with its supervision suite. The notification framework is based instead on *FIFO directories*.

#### [FIFO directories and related tools]

A FIFO directory (or *fifodir*) is a directory in the filesystem asociated with a *notifier*, a process in charge of notifying other processes about some set of events.

A *FIFO* is a named pipe (cf. [[[fifo(7)]](https://man.archlinux.org/man/fifo.7.en)[[]](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/man_page "Special:MyLanguage/man page")]). The fifodir contains FIFOs, each of them associated with a *listener*: a process that wants to be notified about one or more events. A listener creates a FIFO in the fifodir and opens it for reading; this is called *subscribing* to the fifodir. When a certain event happens, the notifier writes to each FIFO in the fifodir. Written data is conventionally a single character encoding the identity of the event. Listeners wait for notifications using some blocking I/O call on the FIFO; unblocking and successfully reading data from it is their notification. A listener that no longer wants to receive notifications removes its FIFO from the fifodir; this is called *unsubscribing*.

FIFOs and FIFO directories need a special ownership and permission setup to work:

-   The owner of a fifodir must be the notifier\'s effective user.
-   A *publicly accessible fifodir* can be subscribed to by any user; its permissions must be **1733** (i.e. `drwx-wx-wt`).
-   A *restricted fifodir* can be subscribed to only by members of the fifodir\'s group; its permissions must be **3730** (i.e. `drwx-ws--T`).
-   The owner of a FIFO in the fifodir must be the corresponding listener\'s effective user; its permissions must be **0622** (`prw--w--w-`). For complete information about FIFO directory internals, refer to available [the documentation](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/fifodir.html).

s6-mkfifodir

[s6-mkfifodir] creates a FIFO directory with the correct ownership and permissions. There is also a [s6-cleanfifodir] program, which removes all FIFOs in a fifodir that don\'t have an active listener. Normally, FIFOs are removed when the corresponding listener unsubscribes, so [s6-cleanfifodir] is a cleanup tool for cases when this fails (e.g. the listener was killed by a signal).

s6-ftrig-notify

[s6-ftrig-notify] notifies all subscribers of a fifodir, and can be used to create a notifier program. It accepts the pathname of a fifodir and a *message* that is written as-is to all FIFOs in the fifodir. Each character in the message is assumed to encode an event, and the character sequence should reflect the event sequence.

s6-ftrig-wait

[s6-ftrig-wait] subscribes to a fifodir and waits for a notification, and can be used to create a listener program. It accepts the pathname of a fifodir and a POSIX Extended Regular Expression (as described in [[[regex(7)]](https://man.archlinux.org/man/regex.7.en)[[]](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/man_page "Special:MyLanguage/man page")]), creates a FIFO in the fifodir with correct ownership and permissions, and waits until it reads a sequence of characters that match the regular expression. Then it unsubscribes from the fifodir by removing the FIFO, prints the last character read from it to its standard output, and exits.

Because performing an action that might trigger an event recognized by a notifier, and subscribing to its fifodir to be notified of the event is susceptible to races that might lead to missing the notification, s6 provides two additional programs: [s6-ftrig-listen] and [s6-ftrig-listen1].

s6-ftrig-listen

[s6-ftrig-listen] subscribes to each specified fifodir, runs a program as a child process with the supplied arguments, and waits for notifications. It makes sure that the program is executed *after* there are listeners begin reading from their FIFOs.

s6-ftrig-listen1

[s6-ftrig-listen1] is a single fifodir and regular expression version of [s6-ftrig-listen] that doesn\'t need [execlineb]-encoded arguments. It prints the last character read from the created FIFO to its standard output.

A timeout can be set for [s6-ftrig-wait], [s6-ftrig-listen] and [s6-ftrig-listen1] by specifying a `-t` option followed by a time value in milliseconds. The programs exit with an error status it they haven\'t been notified about the desired events after the specified time.

#### [][s6-supervise\'s use of notification]

The [event] subdirectory of an s6 servicedir is a fifodir used by [s6-supervise] to notify interested listeners about its supervised process\' state changes. That is, [s6-supervise] acts as the notifier associated with the [event] fifodir, and writes a single character to each FIFO in it when there is a state change:

-   At program startup, after creating [event] if it doesn\'t exist, [s6-supervise] writes an **s** character (*start event*).
-   Each time [s6-supervise] spawns a child process executing the [run] file, it writes a **u** character (*up event*).
-   If the supervised process supports [readiness notification](#s6readiness), [s6-supervise] writes a **U** character (*up and ready event*) when the child process notifies its readiness.
-   If the service directory contains a [finish] file, and, when executed, exits with exit code 125 (permanent failure), [s6-supervise] writes an **O** character (*once event*, the character is a capital \'o\').
-   Each time the supervised process stops running, [s6-supervise] writes a **d** character (*down event*).
-   If the service directory contains a [finish] file, [s6-supervise] writes a **D** character (*really down*) each time [finish] exits or is killed. Otherwise, [s6-supervise] writes the character right after the down event notification.
-   When [s6-supervise] is about to exit normally, it writes an **x** character (*exit event*) after the supervised process stops and it has notified listeners about the really down event.

s6-svwait

[s6-svwait] is a process supervision-specific notification tool. It accepts service directory pathnames and options that specify an event to wait for. At program startup, for each specified servicedir it checks the [status] file in its [supervise] control subdirectory to see if the corresponding supervised process is already in the state implied by the specified event, and if not, it subscribes to the [event] fifodir and waits for notifications from the corresponding [s6-supervise] process.

s6-svlisten

[s6-svlisten] is supervision-specific version of [s6-ftrig-listen]. It accepts servicedir pathnames in the format generated by [execlineb] when [parsing block syntax](https://skarnet.org/software/execline/el_semicolon.html), together with a program name and its arguments, and options that specify an event to wait for. [s6-svlisten1] is a single servicedir version of [s6-svlisten] that doesn\'t need [execlineb]-encoded arguments.

[s6-svwait], [s6-svlisten] and [s6-svlisten1] accept a `-t` option to specify a timeout in the same way as [s6-ftrig-wait].

Finally, the [s6-svc] program accepts a `-w` option that makes it wait for notifications from the [s6-supervise] process corresponding to the service directory specified as argument, after asking it to perform an action on its child process.

Refer to [the \"S6/examples\" page](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/examples#s6notification "S6/examples") for examples of s6 notification mechanisms.

#### [Service readiness notification]

When a process is supervised, it transitions to the \'up\' state when its supervisor has successfully spawned a child process executing the [run] file. [s6-supervise] considers this an *up* event, and notifies all listeners subscribed to the corresponding [event] fifodir about it. But when the supervised process is executing a server program for example, it might not be *ready* to provide its service immediately after startup. Programs might do initialization work that could take some noticeable time before they are actually ready to serve, but it is impossible for the supervisor to know exactly how much. Because of this, and because the kind of initialization to do is program-specific, some sort of collaboration from the supervised process is needed to help the supervisor know when it is ready^[\[7\]](#cite_note-7)^. This is called *readiness notification*.

To support readiness notification under s6, a program implements the s6 readiness notification protocol, which works like this:

1.  At program startup, the program expects to have a file descriptor open for writing, associated with a *notification channel*. The program chooses the file descriptor. For example, it can be specified as a program argument, or be a fixed, program-specific well-know number specified in the program\'s documentation.
2.  When all initialization work necessary to reach the program\'s definition of \'service ready state\' has been completed, it writes a newline character to the notification channel.
3.  The program closes the notification channel after writing to it.

s6 uses readiness notification when a regular file named [notification-fd] is present in a service directory, containing an integer that specifies the program\'s chosen notification channel file descriptor. [s6-supervise] implements the notification channel as a pipe between the supervised process and itself; when it receives a newline character signalling the service\'s readiness, it considers that an *up and ready* event and notifies all listeners subscribed to the [event] fifodir about it. After that, [s6-supervise] no longer reads from the notification pipe, so it can be safely closed by the child process.

** Note**\
Using [s6-svscan]\'s `-d` option signals *shallow readiness*: [s6-svscan]\'s readiness does not mean that all the supervision tree processes launched by it are themselves ready, or even started, or even that their corresponding [s6-supervise] parent processes have been started. Therefore, this option cannot be relied on if a test for *deep readiness*, meaning that all supervision tree processes have been started and are ready, is needed.

s6-notifyoncheck

The [s6-notifyoncheck] program can be used in combination with programs that don\'t support [readiness notification](#s6readiness), but which nevertheless be polled for readiness. In that case, [s6-notifyoncheck] can be invoked from a [run] file, use the available polling mechanisms, and signal readiness itself to [s6-supervise] using the s6 readiness notification protocol.

[s6-notifyoncheck] is a [chain loading](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools-encore#changingstate "Daemontools-encore") program that assumes its working directory is a servicedir. It spawns a child process that polls for readiness, then executes the next program in the chain. By default, the child process will try to execute a file named [check] in a subdirectory named [data] as a child process (i.e. the pathname of the file, relative to [s6-notifyoncheck]\'s working directory, is [data/check]). Just like [run] or [finish], [check] can have any file format that the kernel knows how to execute, but is usually an execline or shell script. When executed, [check] is expected to poll the supervised process for readiness, and then exit with code 0 if the process was verified to be ready, or exit with a nonzero code otherwise.

By default, [s6-notifyoncheck] expects to be able to read the file descriptor it should use for the notification channel from a [notification-fd] file in its working directory (i.e. the file used by [s6-supervise]), and uses a single POSIX `fork()` call to create the polling child process, so the next program in the chain must be able to reap it when it terminates (e.g. with a POSIX `wait()` call). If a `-3` option followed by an unsigned integer value is passed to [s6-notifyoncheck], it will use the specified value as the notification channel\'s file descriptor, ignoring [notification-fd]. And if a `-d` option is passed to [s6-notifyoncheck], it will use two `fork()` calls instead of one (i.e. it will *double fork*), so the poller process will be reparented to process 1 (or to a local reaper), and the next program in the chain won\'t have to reap it. This is useful to avoid having a lingering zombie process if the next program in the chain does not reap child processes it doesn\'t know about.

If the poll for readiness is successful, [s6-notifyoncheck]\'s polling process signals readiness using the notification channel. It periodically retries execution of [check] or invocation of [execlineb] until a poll is successful, a timeout period expires, a certain number of unsuccessful polls has been reached, depending on the options supplied to [s6-notifyoncheck]. It then exits. A retry is performed once every second by default, i.e. the default *polling period* is 1 second, but a different one can be specified by passing a `-w` option to [s6-notifyoncheck], followed by a time value in milliseconds.

Refer to [the \"S6/examples\" page](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/examples#s6readinessnotification "S6/examples") for examples of s6 readiness notification mechanisms.

### [The UNIX domain super-server and related tools]

Refer to [this page](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/UNIX_domain_super-server "S6/UNIX domain super-server").

### [Suidless privilege gain tools]

s6 provides two programs, [s6-sudoc] and [s6-sudod], that can be used to implement controlled privilege gains without setuid programs. This is achieved by:

-   [s6-sudod] running as a long-lived process with an effective user that has the required privileges, and bound to a stream mode UNIX domain socket; and
-   [s6-sudod], which can run with an unprivileged effective user, ask the [s6-sudod] process to perform an action on its behalf.

s6-sudod

[s6-sudod] must be spawned by a UCSPI server (like [s6-ipcserverd]) and accepts options and an argument sequence *s1*, *s2*, \... that can be empty. [s6-sudod] concatenates its argument sequence with the one received from the client, and passes it to a POSIX `execve()` call, which results in a program invocation.

s6-sudoc

[s6-sudoc] must be spawned by a UCSPI client and accepts options and an argument sequence *c1*, *c2*, \... that can also be empty. [s6-sudoc] transmits the argument sequence over the connection to the server, that must be an [s6-sudod] process, and its environment variables, unless it is invoked with an `-e` option. [s6-sudoc] also transmits its standard input, output and error file descriptors to [s6-sudod] using `SCM_RIGHTS` control messages (i.e. [*fd-passing*](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/File_descriptor_holder "S6/File descriptor holder")), so that the invoked program will run as a child process of [s6-sudod], with [s6-sudod]\'s effective user, but its standard input, output and error descriptors will be a copy of [s6-sudoc]\'s. The program\'s environment will be [s6-sudod]\'s environment, except that every variable that is defined but has an empty value will set to the value it has in [s6-sudoc] \'s enviroment, if it is also set. [s6-sudoc] waits until [s6-sudod]\'s child process exits. If it is invoked with a `-T` option followed by a time value in milliseconds, it will close the conection and exit after the specified time has passed if [s6-sudod]\'s child is still running.

s6-sudo

[s6-sudo] takes a UNIX domain socket pathname and an [s6-sudoc] argument sequence, and invokes [s6-ipcclient] chained to [s6-sudoc]. The socket pathname is passed to [s6-ipcclient], and the argument sequence, to [s6-sudoc]. [s6-sudo] options specify corresponding [s6-ipcserver-socketbinder] and [s6-sudoc] options.

Standard permissions settings on [s6-sudo]\'s listening socket can be used to implement some access control, and credentials passing over a UNIX domain socket also allows finer-grained control. The [[s6-ipcserver-access] program](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/UNIX_domain_super-server#ipcserverd "S6/UNIX domain super-server") can be used to take advantage of credentials passing.

** Important**\
If [s6-sudoc] is killed, or exits while [s6-sudod]\'s child process is still running, [s6-sudod] will send a `SIGTERM` followed by a `SIGCONT` signal to its child, and then exit 1. However, sending a `SIGTERM` to the child does not guarantee that it will die, and if it keeps running, it might still read from the file descriptor that was [s6-sudoc]\'s standard input, or write to the file descriptors that were [s6-sudoc]\'s standard output or error. **This is a potential security risk.** Administrators should audit their server programs to make sure this does not happen. More generally, anything using signals or terminals will not be handled transparently by the [s6-sudoc]+[s6-sudod] mechanism. The mechanism was designed to allow programs to gain privileges in specific situations: short-lived, simple, noninteractive processes. It was not designed to emulate full setuid functionality and will not go out of its way to do so. Also, [s6-sudoc]\'s argument sequence may be empty. In that case, the client is in complete control of the program executed as [s6-sudod]\'s child. This setup is permitted but very dangerous, and extreme attention should be paid to access control.

Refer to [the \"S6/examples\" page](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/examples#s6sudo "S6/examples") for a number of examples of usage of s6 privilege gain tool usage.

### [The file descriptor holder and related tools]

Refer to [this page](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/File_descriptor_holder "S6/File descriptor holder"). A combination of these and other s6 tools allow the implementation of the mechanism that [systemd](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Systemd "Systemd") calls *socket activation*, for services that want that.

### [][OpenRC\'s s6 integration feature]

OpenRC can launch supervised long-lived processes using the s6 package as a helper ^[\[8\]](#cite_note-8)^. This is an alternative to \'classic\' unsupervised long-lived processes launched using the [start-stop-daemon] program. It should be noted that service scripts that don\'t contain `start()` and `stop()` functions implicitly use [start-stop-daemon].

OpenRC services that want to use s6 supervision need both a service script in [/etc/init.d/] and an s6 service directory. The service script must contain a `supervisor=s6` variable assignment to turn the feature on, and must have a \'need\' dependency [on the [s6-svscan] service](#openrclaunch) in its `depend()` function, to make sure the [s6-svscan] program is launched. It must not contain:

-   a `start()` function;
-   a `stop()` function (but their `_pre()` and `_post()` variants are OK); or
-   a `status()` function.

When the service script is called with a \'start\' argument, OpenRC internally invokes [s6-svc] with a `-u` option, and can also call [s6-svwait] after [s6-svc] [to wait for an event](#s6notification), by assigning [s6-svwait] options to the `s6_svwait_options_start` variable (e.g. in the service script or the service-specific configuration file in [/etc/conf.d/]). For example, if the service supports [readiness notification](#s6readiness), `s6_svwait_options_start="-U -t 5000"` could be used to make OpenRC wait for the up and ready event with a 5 seconds timeout.

When the service script is called with a \'stop\' argument, OpenRC internally invokes [s6-svc] with the `-d`, `-wD` and `-T` options, so it will wait for a \'really down\' event with a default timeout of 10 seconds. The timeout can be changed by assigning a time value in milliseconds to `s6_service_timeout_stop` variable (e.g. in the service script or the service-specific configuration file in [/etc/conf.d/]).

when the service script is called with a \'status\' argument, OpenRC internally invokes [s6-svstat].

The s6 service directory can be placed anywhere in the filesystem, and have any name, as long as the service script (or the service-specific configuration file in [/etc/conf.d/]) assigns the servicedir\'s absolute path to the `s6_service_path` variable. If `s6_service_path` is not assigned to, the s6 servicedir must have the same name as the OpenRC service script, and will be searched in [/var/svc.d/]. When using this feature, the scan directory is [/run/openrc/s6-scan/], and OpenRC will create a symlink to the service directory when the service is started.

** Warning**\
OpenRC does not integrate as expected when [s6-svscan] is [running as process 1](#s6process1), since OpenRC will launch another [s6-svscan] process with [/run/openrc/s6-scan/] as its scan directory. So the result will be two independent supervision trees.

Refer to [the \"S6/examples\" page](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/examples#s6integration "S6/examples") for a number of examples of OpenRC s6 integration.

### [Starting a supervision tree]

#### [From OpenRC]

[OpenRC](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/OpenRC "OpenRC") provides a service script that can launch [s6-svscan], also named [s6-svscan]. On Gentoo, the scan directory will be [/run/openrc/s6-scan]. This script exists to support the [OpenRC-s6 integration](#s6integration) feature, but can be used to just launch an s6 supervision tree, either when the machine boots via an OpenRC runlevel:

`root `[`#`]`rc-update add s6-svscan default`

Or started manually at any time:

`root `[`#`]`rc-service s6-svscan start`

** Note**\
The service script launches [s6-svscan] using OpenRC\'s [start-stop-daemon] program, so it will run unsupervised, and have its standard input, output and error redirected to [/dev/null].

Because [/run] is a [tmpfs](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Tmpfs "Tmpfs"), and therefore volatile, servicedir symlinks must be created in the scan directory each time the machine boots, before [s6-svscan] starts. The [tmpfiles.d](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/tmpfiles.d.html) interface, which is supported by OpenRC using package opentmpfiles ([[[sys-apps/opentmpfiles]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/opentmpfiles)[]]), can be used for this:

[FILE] **`/etc/tmpfiles.d/s6-svscan.conf`**

    #Type Path Mode UID GID Age Argument
    d /run/openrc/s6-scan
    L /run/openrc/s6-scan/service1 - - - - /path/to/servicedir1
    L /run/openrc/s6-scan/service2 - - - - /path/to/servicedir2
    L /run/openrc/s6-scan/service3 - - - - /path/to/servicedir3

As an alternative, OpenRC\'s [local] service could be used to start the supervision tree when entering OpenRC\'s `default` runlevel, by placing \'.start\' and \'.stop\' files in [/etc/local.d] (cf. [/etc/local.d/README]), which perform actions similar to those of the [s6-svscan] service script:

[FILE] **`/etc/local.d/s6-svscan.start`**

    #!/bin/execlineb -P
    # Remember to add --user if you don't want to run as root
    start-stop-daemon --start --background --make-pidfile
       --pidfile /run/s6-svscan.pid
       --exec /bin/s6-svscan -- -S /path/to/scandir

[FILE] **`/etc/local.d/s6-svscan.stop`**

    #!/bin/execlineb -P
    start-stop-daemon --stop --retry 5 --pidfile /run/s6-svscan.pid

The `-S` option will explicitly disable signal diversion so that the `SIGTERM` signal that [start-stop-daemon] sends to [s6-svscan] will make it act as if an [s6-svscanctl -rt] command had been used.

And as another alternative, OpenRC\'s [local] service could be used to start the supervision tree when entering OpenRC\'s `default` runlevel, with [/service] as the scan directory, using a \'.start\' file that calls the [s6-svscanboot] script provided as an example (see [starting the supervision tree from sysvinit](#sysvinitlaunch)), instead of calling [s6-svscan] directly. This allows setting up a logger program to log messages sent by supervision tree processes to [s6-svscan]\'s standard output and error, provided a service directory for the logger exists in [/service]:

[FILE] **`/etc/local.d/s6-svscan.start`**

    #!/bin/execlineb -P
    # Remember to add --user if you don't want to run as root
    # Remember to symlink /command to /bin
    start-stop-daemon --start --background --make-pidfile
       --pidfile /run/s6-svscan.pid
       --exec /bin/s6-svscanboot

[FILE] **`/etc/local.d/s6-svscan.stop`**

    #!/bin/execlineb -P
    start-stop-daemon --stop --retry 5 --pidfile /run/s6-svscan.pid

#### [From sysvinit]

[[[sys-apps/s6]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6)[]] provides a [s6-svscanboot] execline script, which can be launched and supervised by [sysvinit](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Sysvinit "Sysvinit") by adding a `respawn` line for it in [/etc/inittab]^[\[9\]](#cite_note-9)^. It launches an [s6-svscan] process, with its standard output and error redirected to [/service/s6-svscan-log/fifo]. This allows setting up a FIFO and a logger program to log messages sent by supervision tree processes to [s6-svscan]\'s standard output and error, with the the same technique used by [s6 and s6-rc-based init](#init). [s6-svscan]\'s standard input will be redirected to [/dev/null]. The enviroment will be emptied and then set according to the contents of environment directory [/service/.s6-svscan/env], if it exists, with an [s6-envdir] invocation. The scan directory will be [/service].

To use [s6-svscanboot], copy it from \'s [/usr/share/doc/] subdirectory to [/bin], uncompressing it if necessary. Then, manually edit [/etc/inittab]:

[FILE] **`/etc/inittab`**

    SV:12345:respawn:/bin/s6-svscanboot

and ask [telinit] to reload its configuration:

`root `[`#`]`telinit q`

This will make sysvinit launch and supervise [s6-svscan] when entering [runlevels](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Sysvinit#runlevels "Sysvinit") 1 to 5. Because s6 and execline programs used in the script and invoked using absolute pathnames are assumed to be in the directory [/command/], a symlink to the correct path for Gentoo must be created:

`root `[`#`]`ln -s bin /command`

An s6 service directory for the [s6-svscan] logger can be created with the [s6-linux-init-maker] program from [[[sys-apps/s6-linux-init]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-linux-init)[]]:

`root `[`#`]`s6-envuidgid <user> s6-linux-init-maker -l /service -U <tmpdir> `

`root `[`#`]`cp -a temp/run-image/ /service`

This will create an [s6-log] process logging to [/service/uncaught-logs/], prepending messages with a timestamp in [external TAI64N format](https://cr.yp.to/libtai/tai64.html). The placeholder \"\<user\>\" should be replaced by a valid account\'s username, to allow [s6-log] to run as an unprivileged process. The [\<tmpdir\>] directory will be a temporary directory created by [s6-linux-init-maker] on the working directory; it can be removed once the necessary subdirectories are copied to [/service/].

### [s6 init with s6-rc]

** Warning**\
While Gentoo does offer [[[sys-apps/s6]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6)[]], [[[sys-apps/s6-rc]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-rc)[]] and /}, to use an init system based s6 and s6-rc, an `init=/sbin/s6-gentoo-init` argument can be added to the kernel\'s command line using the [bootloader](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Bootloader "Bootloader")\'s available mechanisms (e.g. a [linux] command in some \'Gentoo with s6 + s6-rc + s6-linux-init\' menu entry for [GRUB](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/GRUB "GRUB")). It is possible to go back to sysvinit+OpenRC at any time, or to any other init system, by reverting the change. Alternatively, the wrapper script can be the [/sbin/init] file, in which case the `init=` parameter is not needed; but on Gentoo, this would conflict with [sysvinit](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Sysvinit "Sysvinit") or [systemd](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Systemd "Systemd") if it was installed with the `sysv-utils` [USE flag](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/USE_flag "USE flag").

[s6-linux-init] runs with its standard input, output and error initially redirected to the machine\'s console. It does all necessary setup for [s6-svscan], including setting up its scan directory. Because at that point in the boot sequence the root filesystem might be the only mounted filesystem, and possibly read-only, [s6-linux-init] also mounts a tmpfs (at [/run] on Gentoo) as a read-write filesystem to hold control files that [s6-svscan] and [s6-supervise] need to write to. [s6-linux-init] uses a directory called the *run image*, that contains the initial scandir, and copies it to the read-write tmpfs as a directory named [service]. When [s6-svscan] starts running as process 1, it uses the directory in the tmpfs as its scandir (so its absolute pathname would be [/run/service/] on Gentoo). The run image can be in a read-only filesystem, and must be subdirectory [run-image] of [s6-linux-init]\'s base directory (normally [/etc/s6-linux-init/current/]).

Because [s6-linux-init] runs as process 1, if it terminates in any way, there will be a kernel panic. Therefore, machine initialization is split between [s6-linux-init], which does a minimal amount of work and then replaces itself with [s6-svscan] using a POSIX `execve()` call, and a [stage2 init](#stage2), which is spawned as a child process by [s6-linux-init].

stage2 init

stage2 init is spawned by [s6-linux-init] as a child process, and is blocked from running until the latter replaces itself with [s6-svscan]. To achieve this, the child process of [s6-linux-init] opens [the catch-all logger\'s FIFO](#fifo) for writing using the POSIX `open()` call. The call will block until some other process opens the FIFO for reading. The catch-all logger is a supervised process, so it starts executing when [s6-svscan] does, and opens the FIFO for reading, thereby unblocking the process, which then replaces itself with the stage2 init. If no catch-all logger is set up, the child process of [s6-linux-init] just \|#stage2\|the stage2 init}} until [s6-svscan] is running as process 1.

#### [Shutdown and reboot]

The shutdown daemon

The init system\'s supervision tree includes a shutdown daemon which receives requests to initiate the shutdown sequence, either immediately or after a certain specified time elapses. The shutdown daemon is [s6-linux-init-shutdownd] [from [\[https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-linux-init [sys-apps/s6-linux-init]\][]]](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6-linux-init#shutdownd "S6-linux-init").

[s6-linux-init-shutdownd] executes a *shutdown file*, and waits for it to terminate. Generally speaking, the shutdown file undoes what [stage2 init](#stage2) has done at boot time, and is normally an execline or shell script. Its code can use s6 tools and s6-rc services to do its work. In particular, if [Template:S6-rc](https://wiki.gentoo.org/index.php?title=Template:S6-rc&action=edit&redlink=1 "Template:S6-rc (page does not exist)") is in use, it can be used to stop all services managed by s6-rc (normally with an [s6-rc -da change] command).

Next, [s6-linux-init-shutdownd] stops all processes from the supervision tree except the catch-all logger (if one is used), kills all remaining processes, unmounts all mounted filesystem, and finally performs the halt, poweroff or reboot operation, as requested.

Optionally, after unmounting filesystems, [s6-linux-init-shutdownd] can also execute a *final shutdown file*, waiting for it to terminate before shutting down the machine. This file can be used to perform actions after all filesystems are unmounted: for example, to deactivate [LVM](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/LVM "LVM") logical volumes using a [vgchange \--activate] command, or to wipe [LUKS](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Dm-crypt "Dm-crypt")-encrypted volumes\' keys from kernel memory and remove their existing mappings using a [cryptsetup close] command. While the final shutdown file is running the only filesystems still mounted are the rootfs (read-only), the tmpfs mounted at [/run] by [s6-linux-init] (read-write), and the devtmpfs, sysfs and proc filesystems.

The shutdown and final shutdown files must be executable files named [rc.shutdown] and [rc.shutdown.final], respectively, and located in the [scripts] subdirectory of [s6-linux-init-shutdownd]\'s base directory (normally [/etc/s6-linux-init/current/]). They are usually execline or shell scripts. Gentoo\'s official repository does not supply any package with a shutdown file or final shutdown file for init systems based on s6 and s6-rc; users must create them from scratch or take them from somewhere else (e.g. alternative ebuild repositories). [[[sys-apps/s6-linux-init]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-linux-init)[]] installs example [rc.shutdown] and [rc.shutdown.final] shell scripts in [/etc/s6-linux-init/skel/] containing comments that illustrate how to set up the init system for a variety of [rc subsystems](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Rc "Rc").

The s6-svscan diverted signal handlers

Since the program running as process 1 is [s6-svscan] [with signal diversion turned on](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6/examples#s6signaldivert "S6/examples"), use of diverted signal handlers defines what happens when it receives a signal. The [s6-linux-init-maker] program from [[[sys-apps/s6-linux-init]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-linux-init)[]] can [create signal handler execline scripts](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6-linux-init#signals "S6-linux-init") for all [s6-svscan]-diverted signals, which either invoke the [s6-linux-init-shutdown] program from the same package to request that the machine be halted / powered off / rebooted, or do nothing. This allows shutting down the machine by sending signals to process 1, in addition to using the [s6-linux-init-shutdown] or [s6-linux-init-hpr] programs.

### [Compatibility scripts]

[s6-svscan] is not directly compatible with [sysvinit](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Sysvinit "Sysvinit")\'s [telinit], [halt], [poweroff], [reboot], and [shutdown] commands. However, the [s6-linux-init-maker] program from [[[sys-apps/s6-linux-init]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-linux-init)[]] can [create execline compatibility scripts](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6-linux-init#sysvinit "S6-linux-init") for these programs that invoke the [s6-linux-init-telinit], [s6-linux-init-shutdown] and [s6-linux-init-hpr] programs from the same package, as appropriate.

#### [Service management]

On an init system based on s6 and s6-rc, the administrator can [replace the init system\'s compiled service database](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6-rc#s6rcupdate "S6-rc") with a new one using [s6-rc-update], and create a new boot-time service database, to be used next time the machine boots, with [s6-rc-compile] and a set of service definitions in that program\'s source format. It\'s best to have the [s6-rc-init] invocation in [stage2 init](#stage2) use a symbolic link as the compiled service database pathname, so that the boot-time database can be changed by modifying the symlink instead of the stage2 init code, e.g. by having an [/etc/s6-rc/db/] directory for storing one or more compiled databases, making [/etc/s6-rc/boot] a symbolic link to one of those databases, and using the symlink in the [s6-rc-init] invocation.

It is possible to have long-lived processes not managed by s6-rc, but supervised by process 1, by managing s6 servicedirs directly, placing them (or symbolic links to them) in the init system\'s scandir, and using [s6-svscanctl -a], [s6-svscanctl -n] or [s6-svscanctl -N] commands as needed. It\'s also possible to use [s6-svscan] as process 1 and just s6 tools, without s6-rc, but then the init system becomes more [like runit](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Runit#servicemgmt "Runit").

s6 servicedirs and s6-rc service definitions for anything not supplied in packages from Gentoo\'s official repository must be created by the administrator, either from scratch or taken from somewhere else (e.g. alternative ebuild repositories).

#### [Runlevels]

An s6-based init system can implement the equivalent of [sysvinit-like runlevels](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Sysvinit#runlevels "Sysvinit"). The [s6-linux-init-maker] program from [[[sys-apps/s6-linux-init]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-linux-init)[]] can [create a runlevel changer service](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6-linux-init#runleveld "S6-linux-init") which performs a \'runlevel change\' by invoking a *runlevel changer file*. The meaning of \'runlevel change\' is defined by whatever this file does when executed.

If [s6-linux-init-maker]\'s runlevel changer service is used, the administrator requests a runlevel change using the [s6-linux-init-telinit] program from [[[sys-apps/s6-linux-init]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-linux-init)[]]. If s6-rc is in use, runlevels can be mapped to [service bundles](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6-rc#bundles "S6-rc") and the runlevel changer file can perform a runlevel change using an [s6-rc change] command with the `-p` (*prune*) option. The runlevel changer file must be an executable file, usually an execline or shell script, named [runlevel] and located in the [scripts] subdirectory of the runlevel changer service\'s base directory (normally [/etc/s6-linux-init/current/]). Gentoo\'s official repository doesn\'t supply any package with a runlevel changer file for s6-based init systems. The [[[sys-apps/s6-linux-init]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/s6-linux-init)[]] package installs an example [runlevel] shell script in [/etc/s6-linux-init/skel/], containing comments that illustrate how to implement runlevel-like functionality for a variety of [rc subsystems](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Rc "Rc").

## [See also]

-   [S6-rc](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/S6-rc "S6-rc") --- a service manager for [s6]-based systems
-   [Daemontools](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools "Daemontools") --- a collection of tools for managing UNIX services
-   [Daemontools-encore](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools-encore "Daemontools-encore") --- a backwards compatible, enhanced version of [Daniel J. Bernstein\'s daemontools package](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools "Daemontools"), written by Bruce Guenter.
-   [Runit](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Runit "Runit") --- lightweight process supervision suite, originally inspired by [daemontools](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Daemontools "Daemontools") that offers fast and reliable service management.
-   [Process supervision](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Process_supervision "Process supervision") --- the ability to manage (long lived) processes or rather *daemons* and be able to get (automated) process restart if needed
-   [Comparison of init systems](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Comparison_of_init_systems "Comparison of init systems") --- compares and contrasts **[init systems](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Init_system "Init system")** for Unix(like) [OSs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operating_system "wikipedia:Operating system")
-   [User:Flexibeast/guides/OpenRC user services via s6](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/User:Flexibeast/guides/OpenRC_user_services_via_s6 "User:Flexibeast/guides/OpenRC user services via s6")

## [External resources]

-   [A thread containing posts about s6 on the Gentoo Forums](https://forums.gentoo.org/viewtopic-t-994548.html).
-   [Tokiclover\'s supervision framework (OpenRC friendly)](https://github.com/tokiclover/supervision)
-   [Avery Payne\'s supervision-scripts project](https://bitbucket.org/avery_payne/supervision-scripts), compatible with s6.
-   [lh-bootstrap](https://www.skarnet.org/software/lh-bootstrap), a set of scripts that build a disk image for a virtual machine such as [QEMU](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/QEMU "QEMU"). The image contains a Linux kernel and a collection of small user-space tools such as BusyBox and dropbear ([[[sys-apps/busybox]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-apps/busybox)[]], [[[net-misc/dropbear]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/net-misc/dropbear)[]]), all statically linked to musl ([[[sys-libs/musl]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sys-libs/musl)[]]), and an s6 and s6-rc-based init system.
-   [Obarun](https://web.obarun.org), an [Arch derivative](https://www.archlinux.org) with an s6 and s6-rc-based init system. It uses a frontend named [66](https://web.obarun.org/software/66).
-   [Slew](https://gitea.com/CasperVector/slew), a project that provides scripts for creating an s6 and s6-rc-based init system, as well as s6-rc service definitions for several services and other supporting scripts, to make an s6 and s6-rc-based init system. Most scripts require Byron Rakitzis\'s implementation of the Plan 9 shell, [rc], for Unix ([[[app-shells/rc]](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/app-shells/rc)[]]).

## [References]

1.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-1)] [[The execline language design and grammar](https://www.skarnet.org/software/execline/grammar.html). Retrieved on July 8th, 2017.]]
2.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-2)] [Laurent Bercot, [Why not just use [/bin/sh]?](https://www.skarnet.org/software/execline/dieshdiedie.html). Retrieved on July 8th, 2017.]]
3.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-3)] [[How to run s6-svscan as process 1](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svscan-1.html). Retrieved on August 20th, 2017.]]
4.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-4)] [Laurent Bercot, [The logging chain](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-log.html#loggingchain), Retrieved on May 1st, 2017.]]
5.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-5)] [Laurent Bercot, [On the syslog design](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-log.html#diesyslogdiedie), Retrieved on May 1st, 2017.]]
6.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-6)] [[Notification vs. polling](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/ftrig.html#notification). Retrieved on July 28th, 2017.]]
7.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-7)] [[Service startup notifications](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/notifywhenup.html). Retrieved on July 29th, 2017.]]
8.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-8)] [[Using s6 with OpenRC](https://github.com/OpenRC/openrc/blob/master/s6-guide.md). Retrieved on June 24th, 2017.]]
9.  [[[↑](#cite_ref-9)] [[How to run s6-svscan under another init process](https://www.skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svscan-not-1.html). Retrieved on July 16th, 2017.]]